THE PRESIDENT:  Thank you very much.
Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, members of Congress, distinguished guests, fellow citizens:  As we gather tonight, our nation is at war, our economy is in recession, and the civilized world faces unprecedented dangers.
Yet the state of our Union has never been stronger.
We last met in an hour of shock and suffering.
In four short months, our nation has comforted the victims, begun to rebuild New York and the Pentagon, rallied a great coalition, captured, arrested, and rid the world of thousands of terrorists, destroyed Afghanistan's terrorist training camps, saved a people from starvation, and freed a country from brutal oppression.
The American flag flies again over our embassy in Kabul.
Terrorists who once occupied Afghanistan now occupy cells at Guantanamo Bay.
And terrorist leaders who urged followers to sacrifice their lives are running for their own.
America and Afghanistan are now allies against terror.
We'll be partners in rebuilding that country.
And this evening we welcome the distinguished interim leader of a liberated Afghanistan:  Chairman Hamid Karzai.
The last time we met in this chamber, the mothers and daughters of Afghanistan were captives in their own homes, forbidden from working or going to school.
Today women are free, and are part of Afghanistan's new government.
And we welcome the new Minister of Women's Affairs, Doctor Sima Samar.
Our progress is a tribute to the spirit of the Afghan people, to the resolve of our coalition, and to the might of the United States military.
When I called our troops into action, I did so with complete confidence in their courage and skill.
And tonight, thanks to them, we are winning the war on terror.
The man and women of our Armed Forces have delivered a message now clear to every enemy of the United States:  Even 7,000 miles away, across oceans and continents, on mountaintops and in caves -- you will not escape the justice of this nation.
For many Americans, these four months have brought sorrow, and pain that will never completely go away.
Every day a retired firefighter returns to Ground Zero, to feel closer to his two sons who died there.
At a memorial in New York, a little boy left his football with a note for his lost father:  Dear Daddy, please take this to heaven.
I don't want to play football until I can play with you again some day.
Last month, at the grave of her husband, Michael, a CIA officer and Marine who died in Mazur-e-Sharif, Shannon Spann said these words of farewell:  "Semper Fi, my love."
Shannon is with us tonight.
Shannon, I assure you and all who have lost a loved one that our cause is just, and our country will never forget the debt we owe Michael and all who gave their lives for freedom.
Our cause is just, and it continues.
Our discoveries in Afghanistan confirmed our worst fears, and showed us the true scope of the task ahead.
We have seen the depth of our enemies' hatred in videos, where they laugh about the loss of innocent life.
And the depth of their hatred is equaled by the madness of the destruction they design.
We have found diagrams of American nuclear power plants and public water facilities, detailed instructions for making chemical weapons, surveillance maps of American cities, and thorough descriptions of landmarks in America and throughout the world.
What we have found in Afghanistan confirms that, far from ending there, our war against terror is only beginning.
Most of the 19 men who hijacked planes on September the 11th were trained in Afghanistan's camps, and so were tens of thousands of others.
Thousands of dangerous killers, schooled in the methods of murder, often supported by outlaw regimes, are now spread throughout the world like ticking time bombs, set to go off without warning.
Thanks to the work of our law enforcement officials and coalition partners, hundreds of terrorists have been arrested.
Yet, tens of thousands of trained terrorists are still at large.
These enemies view the entire world as a battlefield, and we must pursue them wherever they are.
So long as training camps operate, so long as nations harbor terrorists, freedom is at risk.
And America and our allies must not, and will not, allow it.
Our nation will continue to be steadfast and patient and persistent in the pursuit of two great objectives.
First, we will shut down terrorist camps, disrupt terrorist plans, and bring terrorists to justice.
And, second, we must prevent the terrorists and regimes who seek chemical, biological or nuclear weapons from threatening the United States and the world.
Our military has put the terror training camps of Afghanistan out of business, yet camps still exist in at least a dozen countries.
A terrorist underworld -- including groups like Hamas, Hezbollah, Islamic Jihad, Jaish-i-Mohammed -- operates in remote jungles and deserts, and hides in the centers of large cities.
While the most visible military action is in Afghanistan, America is acting elsewhere.
We now have troops in the Philippines, helping to train that country's armed forces to go after terrorist cells that have executed an American, and still hold hostages.
Our soldiers, working with the Bosnian government, seized terrorists who were plotting to bomb our embassy.
Our Navy is patrolling the coast of Africa to block the shipment of weapons and the establishment of terrorist camps in Somalia.
My hope is that all nations will heed our call, and eliminate the terrorist parasites who threaten their countries and our own.
Many nations are acting forcefully.
Pakistan is now cracking down on terror, and I admire the strong leadership of President Musharraf.
But some governments will be timid in the face of terror.
And make no mistake about it:  If they do not act, America will.
Our second goal is to prevent regimes that sponsor terror from threatening America or our friends and allies with weapons of mass destruction.
Some of these regimes have been pretty quiet since September the 11th.
But we know their true nature.
North Korea is a regime arming with missiles and weapons of mass destruction, while starving its citizens.
Iran aggressively pursues these weapons and exports terror, while an unelected few repress the Iranian people's hope for freedom.
Iraq continues to flaunt its hostility toward America and to support terror.
The Iraqi regime has plotted to develop anthrax, and nerve gas, and nuclear weapons for over a decade.
This is a regime that has already used poison gas to murder thousands of its own citizens -- leaving the bodies of mothers huddled over their dead children.
This is a regime that agreed to international inspections -- then kicked out the inspectors.
This is a regime that has something to hide from the civilized world.
States like these, and their terrorist allies, constitute an axis of evil, arming to threaten the peace of the world.
By seeking weapons of mass destruction, these regimes pose a grave and growing danger.
They could provide these arms to terrorists, giving them the means to match their hatred.
They could attack our allies or attempt to blackmail the United States.
In any of these cases, the price of indifference would be catastrophic.
We will work closely with our coalition to deny terrorists and their state sponsors the materials, technology, and expertise to make and deliver weapons of mass destruction.
We will develop and deploy effective missile defenses to protect America and our allies from sudden attack.
And all nations should know:  America will do what is necessary to ensure our nation's security.
We'll be deliberate, yet time is not on our side.
I will not wait on events, while dangers gather.
I will not stand by, as peril draws closer and closer.
The United States of America will not permit the world's most dangerous regimes to threaten us with the world's most destructive weapons.
Our war on terror is well begun, but it is only begun.
This campaign may not be finished on our watch -- yet it must be and it will be waged on our watch.
We can't stop short.
If we stop now -- leaving terror camps intact and terror states unchecked -- our sense of security would be false and temporary.
History has called America and our allies to action, and it is both our responsibility and our privilege to fight freedom's fight.
Our first priority must always be the security of our nation, and that will be reflected in the budget I send to Congress.
My budget supports three great goals for America:  We will win this war; we'll protect our homeland; and we will revive our economy.
September the 11th brought out the best in America, and the best in this Congress.
And I join the American people in applauding your unity and resolve.
Now Americans deserve to have this same spirit directed toward addressing problems here at home.
I'm a proud member of my party -- yet as we act to win the war, protect our people, and create jobs in America, we must act, first and foremost, not as Republicans, not as Democrats, but as Americans.
It costs a lot to fight this war.
We have spent more than a billion dollars a month -- over $30 million a day -- and we must be prepared for future operations.
Afghanistan proved that expensive precision weapons defeat the enemy and spare innocent lives, and we need more of them.
We need to replace aging aircraft and make our military more agile, to put our troops anywhere in the world quickly and safely.
Our men and women in uniform deserve the best weapons, the best equipment, the best training -- and they also deserve another pay raise.
My budget includes the largest increase in defense spending in two decades -- because while the price of freedom and security is high, it is never too high.
Whatever it costs to defend our country, we will pay.
The next priority of my budget is to do everything possible to protect our citizens and strengthen our nation against the ongoing threat of another attack.
Time and distance from the events of September the 11th will not make us safer unless we act on its lessons.
America is no longer protected by vast oceans.
We are protected from attack only by vigorous action abroad, and increased vigilance at home.
My budget nearly doubles funding for a sustained strategy of homeland security, focused on four key areas:  bioterrorism, emergency response, airport and border security, and improved intelligence.
We will develop vaccines to fight anthrax and other deadly diseases.
We'll increase funding to help states and communities train and equip our heroic police and firefighters.
We will improve intelligence collection and sharing, expand patrols at our borders, strengthen the security of air travel, and use technology to track the arrivals and departures of visitors to the United States.
Homeland security will make America not only stronger, but, in many ways, better.
Knowledge gained from bioterrorism research will improve public health.
Stronger police and fire departments will mean safer neighborhoods.
Stricter border enforcement will help combat illegal drugs.
And as government works to better secure our homeland, America will continue to depend on the eyes and ears of alert citizens.
A few days before Christmas, an airline flight attendant spotted a passenger lighting a match.
The crew and passengers quickly subdued the man, who had been trained by al Qaeda and was armed with explosives.
The people on that plane were alert and, as a result, likely saved nearly 200 lives.
And tonight we welcome and thank flight attendants Hermis Moutardier and Christina Jones.
Once we have funded our national security and our homeland security, the final great priority of my budget is economic security for the American people.
To achieve these great national objectives -- to win the war, protect the homeland, and revitalize our economy -- our budget will run a deficit that will be small and short-term, so long as Congress restrains spending and acts in a fiscally responsible manner.
We have clear priorities and we must act at home with the same purpose and resolve we have shown overseas:  We'll prevail in the war, and we will defeat this recession.
Americans who have lost their jobs need our help and I support extending unemployment benefits and direct assistance for health care coverage.
Yet, American workers want more than unemployment checks -- they want a steady paycheck.
When America works, America prospers, so my economic security plan can be summed up in one word:  jobs.
Good jobs begin with good schools, and here we've made a fine start.
Republicans and Democrats worked together to achieve historic education reform so that no child is left behind.
I was proud to work with members of both parties:  Chairman John Boehner and Congressman George Miller.
Senator Judd Gregg.
And I was so proud of our work, I even had nice things to say about my friend, Ted Kennedy.
(Laughter and applause.)
I know the folks at the Crawford coffee shop couldn't believe I'd say such a thing -- (laughter) -- but our work on this bill shows what is possible if we set aside posturing and focus on results.
There is more to do.
We need to prepare our children to read and succeed in school with improved Head Start and early childhood development programs.
We must upgrade our teacher colleges and teacher training and launch a major recruiting drive with a great goal for America:  a quality teacher in every classroom.
Good jobs also depend on reliable and affordable energy.
This Congress must act to encourage conservation, promote technology, build infrastructure, and it must act to increase energy production at home so America is less dependent on foreign oil.
Good jobs depend on expanded trade.
Selling into new markets creates new jobs, so I ask Congress to finally approve trade promotion authority.
On these two key issues, trade and energy, the House of Representatives has acted to create jobs, and I urge the Senate to pass this legislation.
Good jobs depend on sound tax policy.
Last year, some in this hall thought my tax relief plan was too small; some thought it was too big.
But when the checks arrived in the mail, most Americans thought tax relief was just about right.
Congress listened to the people and responded by reducing tax rates, doubling the child credit, and ending the death tax.
For the sake of long-term growth and to help Americans plan for the future, let's make these tax cuts permanent.
The way out of this recession, the way to create jobs, is to grow the economy by encouraging investment in factories and equipment, and by speeding up tax relief so people have more money to spend.
For the sake of American workers, let's pass a stimulus package.
Good jobs must be the aim of welfare reform.
As we reauthorize these important reforms, we must always remember the goal is to reduce dependency on government and offer every American the dignity of a job.
Americans know economic security can vanish in an instant without health security.
I ask Congress to join me this year to enact a patients' bill of rights -- (applause) -- to give uninsured workers credits to help buy health coverage -- (applause) -- to approve an historic increase in the spending for veterans' health -- (applause) -- and to give seniors a sound and modern Medicare system that includes coverage for prescription drugs.
A good job should lead to security in retirement.
I ask Congress to enact new safeguards for 401K and pension plans.
Employees who have worked hard and saved all their lives should not have to risk losing everything if their company fails.
Through stricter accounting standards and tougher disclosure requirements, corporate America must be made more accountable to employees and shareholders and held to the highest standards of conduct.
Retirement security also depends upon keeping the commitments of Social Security, and we will.
We must make Social Security financially stable and allow personal retirement accounts for younger workers who choose them.
Members, you and I will work together in the months ahead on other issues:  productive farm policy -- (applause) -- a cleaner environment -- (applause) -- broader home ownership, especially among minorities -- (applause) -- and ways to encourage the good work of charities and faith-based groups.
I ask you to join me on these important domestic issues in the same spirit of cooperation we've applied to our war against terrorism.
During these last few months, I've been humbled and privileged to see the true character of this country in a time of testing.
Our enemies believed America was weak and materialistic, that we would splinter in fear and selfishness.
They were as wrong as they are evil.
The American people have responded magnificently, with courage and compassion, strength and resolve.
As I have met the heroes, hugged the families, and looked into the tired faces of rescuers, I have stood in awe of the American people.
And I hope you will join me -- I hope you will join me in expressing thanks to one American for the strength and calm and comfort she brings to our nation in crisis, our First Lady, Laura Bush.
None of us would ever wish the evil that was done on September the 11th.
Yet after America was attacked, it was as if our entire country looked into a mirror and saw our better selves.
We were reminded that we are citizens, with obligations to each other, to our country, and to history.
We began to think less of the goods we can accumulate, and more about the good we can do.
For too long our culture has said, "If it feels good, do it."
Now America is embracing a new ethic and a new creed: "Let's roll."
In the sacrifice of soldiers, the fierce brotherhood of firefighters, and the bravery and generosity of ordinary citizens, we have glimpsed what a new culture of responsibility could look like.
We want to be a nation that serves goals larger than self.
We've been offered a unique opportunity, and we must not let this moment pass.
My call tonight is for every American to commit at least two years -- 4,000 hours over the rest of your lifetime -- to the service of your neighbors and your nation.
Many are already serving, and I thank you.
If you aren't sure how to help, I've got a good place to start.
To sustain and extend the best that has emerged in America, I invite you to join the new USA Freedom Corps.
The Freedom Corps will focus on three areas of need:  responding in case of crisis at home; rebuilding our communities; and extending American compassion throughout the world.
One purpose of the USA Freedom Corps will be homeland security.
America needs retired doctors and nurses who can be mobilized in major emergencies; volunteers to help police and fire departments; transportation and utility workers well-trained in spotting danger.
Our country also needs citizens working to rebuild our communities.
We need mentors to love children, especially children whose parents are in prison.
And we need more talented teachers in troubled schools.
USA Freedom Corps will expand and improve the good efforts of AmeriCorps and Senior Corps to recruit more than 200,000 new volunteers.
And America needs citizens to extend the compassion of our country to every part of the world.
So we will renew the promise of the Peace Corps, double its volunteers over the next five years -- (applause) -- and ask it to join a new effort to encourage development and education and opportunity in the Islamic world.
This time of adversity offers a unique moment of opportunity -- a moment we must seize to change our culture.
Through the gathering momentum of millions of acts of service and decency and kindness, I know we can overcome evil with greater good.
And we have a great opportunity during this time of war to lead the world toward the values that will bring lasting peace.
All fathers and mothers, in all societies, want their children to be educated, and live free from poverty and violence.
No people on Earth yearn to be oppressed, or aspire to servitude, or eagerly await the midnight knock of the secret police.
If anyone doubts this, let them look to Afghanistan, where the Islamic "street" greeted the fall of tyranny with song and celebration.
Let the skeptics look to Islam's own rich history, with its centuries of learning, and tolerance and progress.
America will lead by defending liberty and justice because they are right and true and unchanging for all people everywhere.
No nation owns these aspirations, and no nation is exempt from them.
We have no intention of imposing our culture.
But America will always stand firm for the non-negotiable demands of human dignity:  the rule of law; limits on the power of the state; respect for women; private property; free speech; equal justice; and religious tolerance.
America will take the side of brave men and women who advocate these values around the world, including the Islamic world, because we have a greater objective than eliminating threats and containing resentment.
We seek a just and peaceful world beyond the war on terror.
In this moment of opportunity, a common danger is erasing old rivalries.
America is working with Russia and China and India, in ways we have never before, to achieve peace and prosperity.
In every region, free markets and free trade and free societies are proving their power to lift lives.
Together with friends and allies from Europe to Asia, and Africa to Latin America, we will demonstrate that the forces of terror cannot stop the momentum of freedom.
The last time I spoke here, I expressed the hope that life would return to normal.
In some ways, it has.
In others, it never will.
Those of us who have lived through these challenging times have been changed by them.
We've come to know truths that we will never question:  evil is real, and it must be opposed.
Beyond all differences of race or creed, we are one country, mourning together and facing danger together.
Deep in the American character, there is honor, and it is stronger than cynicism.
And many have discovered again that even in tragedy -- especially in tragedy -- God is near.
In a single instant, we realized that this will be a decisive decade in the history of liberty, that we've been called to a unique role in human events.
Rarely has the world faced a choice more clear or consequential.
Our enemies send other people's children on missions of suicide and murder.
They embrace tyranny and death as a cause and a creed.
We stand for a different choice, made long ago, on the day of our founding.
We affirm it again today.
We choose freedom and the dignity of every life.
Steadfast in our purpose, we now press on.
We have known freedom's price.
We have shown freedom's power.
And in this great conflict, my fellow Americans, we will see freedom's victory.
Thank you all.
May God bless.
Mr. Speaker, Vice President Cheney, Members of Congress, distinguished guests, fellow citizens: 
Every year, by law and by custom, we meet here to consider the state of the union.
This year, we gather in this chamber deeply aware of decisive days that lie ahead.
You and I serve our country in a time of great consequence.
During this session of Congress, we have the duty to reform domestic programs vital to our country...and we have the opportunity to save millions of lives abroad from a terrible disease.
We will work for a prosperity that is broadly shared...and we will answer every danger and every enemy that threatens the American people.
In all these days of promise and days of reckoning, we can be confident.
In a whirlwind of change, and hope, and peril, our faith is sure, our resolve is firm, and our union is strong.
This country has many challenges.
We will not deny, we will not ignore, we will not pass along our problems to other Congresses, other presidents, and other generations.
We will confront them with focus, and clarity, and courage.
During the last two years, we have seen what can be accomplished when we work together.
To lift the standards of our public schools, we achieved historic education reform - which must now be carried out in every school, and every classroom, so that every child in America can read, and learn, and succeed in life.
To protect our country, we reorganized our government and created the Department of Homeland Security - which is mobilizing against the threats of a new era.
To bring our economy out of recession, we delivered the largest tax relief in a generation.
To insist on integrity in American business, we passed tough reforms, and we are holding corporate criminals to account.
Some might call this a good record.
I call it a good start.
Tonight I ask the House and Senate to join me in the next bold steps to serve our fellow citizens.
Our first goal is clear: We must have an economy that grows fast enough to employ every man and woman who seeks a job.
After recession, terrorist attacks, corporate scandals, and stock market declines, our economy is recovering - yet it is not growing fast enough, or strongly enough.
With unemployment rising, our Nation needs more small businesses to open, more companies to invest and expand, more employers to put up the sign that says, "Help Wanted."
Jobs are created when the economy grows; the economy grows when Americans have more money to spend and invest; and the best, fairest way to make sure Americans have that money is not to tax it away in the first place.
I am proposing that all the income tax reductions set for 2004 and 2006 be made permanent and effective this year.
And under my plan, as soon as I have signed the bill, this extra money will start showing up in workers' paychecks.
Instead of gradually reducing the marriage penalty, we should do it now.
Instead of slowly raising the child credit to a thousand dollars, we should send the checks to American families now.
This tax relief is for everyone who pays income taxes - and it will help our economy immediately.
Ninety-two million Americans will keep - this year - an average of almost 1,100 dollars more of their own money.
A family of four with an income of 40,000 dollars would see their federal income taxes fall from 1,178 dollars to 45 dollars per year.
And our plan will improve the bottom line for more than 23 million small businesses.
You, the Congress, have already passed all these reductions, and promised them for future years.
If this tax relief is good for Americans three, or five, or seven years from now, it is even better for Americans today.
We also strengthen the economy by treating investors equally in our tax laws.
It is fair to tax a company's profits.
It is not fair to again tax the shareholder on the same profits.
To boost investor confidence, and to help the nearly 10 million seniors who receive dividend income, I ask you to end the unfair double taxation of dividends.
Lower taxes and greater investment will help this economy expand.
More jobs mean more taxpayers - and higher revenues to our government.
The best way to address the deficit and move toward a balanced budget is to encourage economic growth - and to show some spending discipline in Washington, D.C. We must work together to fund only our most important priorities.
I will send you a budget that increases discretionary spending by four percent next year - about as much as the average family's income is expected to grow.
And that is a good benchmark for us: Federal spending should not rise any faster than the paychecks of American families.
A growing economy, and a focus on essential priorities, will also be crucial to the future of Social Security.
As we continue to work together to keep Social Security sound and reliable, we must offer younger workers a chance to invest in retirement accounts that they will control and they will own.
Our second goal is high quality, affordable health care for all Americans.
The American system of medicine is a model of skill and innovation - with a pace of discovery that is adding good years to our lives.
Yet for many people, medical care costs too much - and many have no coverage at all.
These problems will not be solved with a nationalized health care system that dictates coverage and rations care.
Instead, we must work toward a system in which all Americans have a good insurance policy...choose their own doctors..and seniors and low-income Americans receive the help they need.
Instead of bureaucrats, and trial lawyers, and HMOs, we must put doctors, and nurses, and patients back in charge of American medicine.
Health care reform must begin with Medicare, because Medicare is the binding commitment of a caring society.
We must renew that commitment by giving seniors access to the preventive medicine and new drugs that are transforming health care in America.
Seniors happy with the current Medicare system should be able to keep their coverage just the way it is.
And just like you, the members of Congress, members of your staffs, and other federal employees, all seniors should have the choice of a health care plan that provides prescription drugs.
My budget will commit an additional 400 billion dollars over the next decade to reform and strengthen Medicare.
Leaders of both political parties have talked for years about strengthening Medicare - I urge the members of this new Congress to act this year.
To improve our health care system, we must address one of the prime causes of higher costs - the constant threat that physicians and hospitals will be unfairly sued.
Because of excessive litigation, everybody pays more for health care - and many parts of America are losing fine doctors.
No one has ever been healed by a frivolous lawsuit - and I urge the Congress to pass medical liability reform.
Our third goal is to promote energy independence for our country, while dramatically improving the environment.
I have sent you a comprehensive energy plan to promote energy efficiency and conservation, to develop cleaner technology, and to produce more energy at home.
I have sent you Clear Skies legislation that mandates a 70 percent cut in air pollution from power plants over the next 15 years.
I have sent you a Healthy Forests Initiative, to help prevent the catastrophic fires that devastate communities, kill wildlife, and burn away millions of acres of treasured forest.
I urge you to pass these measures, for the good of both our environment and our economy.
Even more, I ask you to take a crucial step, and protect our environment in ways that generations before us could not have imagined.
In this century, the greatest environmental progress will come about, not through endless lawsuits or command and control regulations, but through technology and innovation.
Tonight I am proposing 1.2 billion dollars in research funding so that America can lead the world in developing clean, hydrogen-powered automobiles.
A simple chemical reaction between hydrogen and oxygen generates energy, which can be used to power a car - producing only water, not exhaust fumes.
With a new national commitment, our scientists and engineers will overcome obstacles to taking these cars from laboratory to showroom - so that the first car driven by a child born today could be powered by hydrogen, and pollution-free.
Join me in this important innovation - to make our air significantly cleaner, and our country much less dependent on foreign sources of energy.
Our fourth goal is to apply the compassion of America to the deepest problems of America.
For so many in our country - the homeless, the fatherless, the addicted - the need is great.
Yet there is power - wonder-working power - in the goodness, and idealism, and faith of the American people.
Americans are doing the work of compassion every day - visiting prisoners, providing shelter to battered women, bringing companionship to lonely seniors.
These good works deserve our praise...they deserve our personal support...and, when appropriate, they deserve the assistance of our government.
I urge you to pass both my faith-based initiative and the Citizen Service Act - to encourage acts of compassion that can transform America, one heart and one soul at a time.
Last year, I called on my fellow citizens to participate in USA Freedom Corps, which is enlisting tens of thousands of new volunteers across America.
Tonight I ask Congress and the American people to focus the spirit of service and the resources of government on the needs of some of our most vulnerable citizens - boys and girls trying to grow up without guidance and attention...and children who have to go through a prison gate to be hugged by their mom or dad.
I propose a 450 million dollar initiative to bring mentors to more than a million disadvantaged junior high students and children of prisoners.
Government will support the training and recruiting of mentors, yet it is the men and women of America who will fill the need.
One mentor, one person, can change a life forever - and I urge you to be that one person.
Another cause of hopelessness is addiction to drugs.
Addiction crowds out friendship, ambition, moral conviction, and reduces all the richness of life to a single destructive desire.
As a government, we are fighting illegal drugs by cutting off supplies, and reducing demand through anti-drug education programs.
Yet for those already addicted, the fight against drugs is a fight for their own lives.
Too many Americans in search of treatment cannot get it.
So tonight I propose a new 600 million dollar program to help an additional 300,000 Americans receive treatment over the next three years.
Our Nation is blessed with recovery programs that do amazing work.
One of them is found at the Healing Place Church in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
A man in the program said, "God does miracles in people .s lives, and you never think it could be you."
Tonight, let us bring to all Americans who struggle with drug addiction this message of hope: The miracle of recovery is possible, and it could be you.
By caring for children who need mentors, and for addicted men and women who need treatment, we are building a more welcoming society - a culture that values every life.
And in this work we must not overlook the weakest among us.
I ask you to protect infants at the very hour of birth, and end the practice of partial-birth abortion.
And because no human life should be started or ended as the object of an experiment, I ask you to set a high standard for humanity and pass a law against all human cloning.
The qualities of courage and compassion that we strive for in America also determine our conduct abroad.
The American flag stands for more than our power and our interests.
Our Founders dedicated this country to the cause of human dignity - the rights of every person and the possibilities of every life.
This conviction leads us into the world to help the afflicted, and defend the peace, and confound the designs of evil men.
In Afghanistan, we helped to liberate an oppressed people...and we will continue helping them secure their country, rebuild their society, and educate all their children - boys and girls.
In the Middle East, we will continue to seek peace between a secure Israel and a democratic Palestine.
Across the earth, America is feeding the hungry; more than 60 percent of international food aid comes as a gift from the people of the United States.
As our Nation moves troops and builds alliances to make our world safer, we must also remember our calling, as a blessed country, to make this world better.
Today, on the continent of Africa, nearly 30 million people have the AIDS virus - including three million children under the age of 15.
There are whole countries in Africa where more than one-third of the adult population carries the infection.
More than four million require immediate drug treatment.
Yet across that continent, only 50,000 AIDS victims - only 50,000 - are receiving the medicine they need.
Because the AIDS diagnosis is considered a death sentence, many do not seek treatment.
Almost all who do are turned away.
A doctor in rural South Africa describes his frustration.
He says, "We have no medicines..many hospitals tell [people], 'You've got AIDS.
We can't help you.
Go home and die.'
" 
In an age of miraculous medicines, no person should have to hear those words.
AIDS can be prevented.
Anti-retroviral drugs can extend life for many years.
And the cost of those drugs has dropped from 12,000 dollars a year to under 300 dollars a year - which places a tremendous possibility within our grasp.
Ladies and gentlemen, seldom has history offered a greater opportunity to do so much for so many.
We have confronted, and will continue to confront, HIV/AIDS in our own country.
And to meet a severe and urgent crisis abroad, tonight I propose the Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief - a work of mercy beyond all current international efforts to help the people of Africa.
This comprehensive plan will prevent seven million new AIDS infections...treat at least two million people with life-extending drugs...and provide humane care for millions of people suffering from AIDS, and for children orphaned by AIDS.
I ask the Congress to commit 15 billion dollars over the next five years, including nearly ten billion dollars in new money, to turn the tide against AIDS in the most afflicted nations of Africa and the Caribbean.
This Nation can lead the world in sparing innocent people from a plague of nature.
And this Nation is leading the world in confronting and defeating the man-made evil of international terrorism.
There are days when the American people do not hear news about the war on terror.
There is never a day when I do not learn of another threat, or receive reports of operations in progress, or give an order in this global war against a scattered network of killers.
The war goes on, and we are winning.
To date we have arrested, or otherwise dealt with, many key commanders of al-Qaida.
They include a man who directed logistics and funding for the September 11th attacks...the chief of al-Qaida operations in the Persian Gulf who planned the bombings of our embassies in East Africa and the USS Cole...an al-Qaida operations chief from Southeast Asia...a former director of al-Qaida's training camps in Afghanistan...a key al-Qaida operative in Europe..and a major al-Qaida leader in Yemen.
All told, more than 3,000 suspected terrorists have been arrested in many countries.
And many others have met a different fate.
They are no longer a problem for the United States and our friends and allies.
We are working closely with other nations to prevent further attacks.
America and coalition countries have uncovered and stopped terrorist conspiracies targeting the American embassy in Yemen...the American embassy in Singapore...a Saudi military base...and ships in the straits of Hormuz, and the straits of Gibraltar.
We have broken al-Qaida cells in Hamburg, and Milan, and Madrid, and London, and Paris - as well as Buffalo, New York.
We have the terrorists on the run, and we are keeping them on the run.
One by one, the terrorists are learning the meaning of American justice.
As we fight this war, we will remember where it began - here, in our own country.
This government is taking unprecedented measures to protect our people and defend our homeland.
We have intensified security at the borders and ports of entry...posted more than 50,000 newly trained federal screeners in airports...begun inoculating troops and first responders against smallpox...and are deploying the Nation's first early warning network of sensors to detect biological attack.
And this year, for the first time, we are beginning to field a defense to protect this Nation against ballistic missiles.
I thank the Congress for supporting these measures.
I ask you tonight to add to our future security with a major research and production effort to guard our people against bio-terrorism, called Project Bioshield.
The budget I send you will propose almost six billion dollars to quickly make available effective vaccines and treatments against agents like anthrax, botulinum toxin, Ebola, and plague.
We must assume that our enemies would use these diseases as weapons, and we must act before the dangers are upon us.
Since September 11th, our intelligence and law enforcement agencies have worked more closely than ever to track and disrupt the terrorists.
The FBI is improving its ability to analyze intelligence, and transforming itself to meet new threats.
And tonight, I am instructing the leaders of the FBI, Central Intelligence, Homeland Security, and the Department of Defense to develop a Terrorist Threat Integration Center, to merge and analyze all threat information in a single location.
Our government must have the very best information possible, and we will use it to make sure the right people are in the right places to protect our citizens.
Our war against terror is a contest of will, in which perseverance is power.
In the ruins of two towers, at the western wall of the Pentagon, on a field in Pennsylvania, this Nation made a pledge, and we renew that pledge tonight: Whatever the duration of this struggle, and whatever the difficulties, we will not permit the triumph of violence in the affairs of men...free people will set the course of history.
Today, the gravest danger in the war on terror...the gravest danger facing America and the world...is outlaw regimes that seek and possess nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons.
These regimes could use such weapons for blackmail, terror, and mass murder.
They could also give or sell those weapons to their terrorist allies, who would use them without the least hesitation.
This threat is new; America's duty is familiar.
Throughout the 20th century, small groups of men seized control of great nations...built armies and arsenals..and set out to dominate the weak and intimidate the world.
In each case, their ambitions of cruelty and murder had no limit.
In each case, the ambitions of Hitlerism, militarism, and communism were defeated by the will of free peoples, by the strength of great alliances, and by the might of the United States of America.
Now, in this century, the ideology of power and domination has appeared again, and seeks to gain the ultimate weapons of terror.
Once again, this Nation and our friends are all that stand between a world at peace, and a world of chaos and constant alarm.
Once again, we are called to defend the safety of our people, and the hopes of all mankind.
And we accept this responsibility.
America is making a broad and determined effort to confront these dangers.
We have called on the United Nations to fulfill its charter, and stand by its demand that Iraq disarm.
We are strongly supporting the International Atomic Energy Agency in its mission to track and control nuclear materials around the world.
We are working with other governments to secure nuclear materials in the former Soviet Union, and to strengthen global treaties banning the production and shipment of missile technologies and weapons of mass destruction.
In all of these efforts, however, America's purpose is more than to follow a process - it is to achieve a result: the end of terrible threats to the civilized world.
All free nations have a stake in preventing sudden and catastrophic attack.
We are asking them to join us, and many are doing so.
Yet the course of this Nation does not depend on the decisions of others.
Whatever action is required, whenever action is necessary, I will defend the freedom and security of the American people.
Different threats require different strategies.
In Iran, we continue to see a government that represses its people, pursues weapons of mass destruction, and supports terror.
We also see Iranian citizens risking intimidation and death as they speak out for liberty, human rights, and democracy.
Iranians, like all people, have a right to choose their own government, and determine their own destiny - and the United States supports their aspirations to live in freedom.
On the Korean peninsula, an oppressive regime rules a people living in fear and starvation.
Throughout the 1990s, the United States relied on a negotiated framework to keep North Korea from gaining nuclear weapons.
We now know that the regime was deceiving the world, and developing those weapons all along.
And today the North Korean regime is using its nuclear program to incite fear and seek concessions.
America and the world will not be blackmailed.
America is working with the countries of the region - South Korea, Japan, China, and Russia - to find a peaceful solution, and to show the North Korean government that nuclear weapons will bring only isolation, economic stagnation, and continued hardship.
The North Korean regime will find respect in the world, and revival for its people, only when it turns away from its nuclear ambitions.
Our Nation and the world must learn the lessons of the Korean peninsula, and not allow an even greater threat to rise up in Iraq.
A brutal dictator, with a history of reckless aggression..with ties to terrorism... with great potential wealth...will not be permitted to dominate a vital region and threaten the United States.
Twelve years ago, Saddam Hussein faced the prospect of being the last casualty in a war he had started and lost.
To spare himself, he agreed to disarm of all weapons of mass destruction.
For the next 12 years, he systematically violated that agreement.
He pursued chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons even while inspectors were in his country.
Nothing to date has restrained him from his pursuit of these weapons - not economic sanctions, not isolation from the civilized world, not even cruise missile strikes on his military facilities.
Almost three months ago, the United Nations Security Council gave Saddam Hussein his final chance to disarm.
He has shown instead his utter contempt for the United Nations, and for the opinion of the world.
The 108 UN weapons inspectors were not sent to conduct a scavenger hunt for hidden materials across a country the size of California.
The job of the inspectors is to verify that Iraq's regime is disarming.
It is up to Iraq to show exactly where it is hiding its banned weapons...lay those weapons out for the world to see...and destroy them as directed.
Nothing like this has happened.
The United Nations concluded in 1999 that Saddam Hussein had biological weapons materials sufficient to produce over 25,000 liters of anthrax - enough doses to kill several million people.
He has not accounted for that material.
He has given no evidence that he has destroyed it.
The United Nations concluded that Saddam Hussein had materials sufficient to produce more than 38,000 liters of botulinum toxin - enough to subject millions of people to death by respiratory failure.
He has not accounted for that material.
He has given no evidence that he has destroyed it.
Our intelligence officials estimate that Saddam Hussein had the materials to produce as much as 500 tons of sarin, mustard, and VX nerve agent.
In such quantities, these chemical agents also could kill untold thousands.
He has not accounted for these materials.
He has given no evidence that he has destroyed them.
U.S. intelligence indicates that Saddam Hussein had upwards of 30,000 munitions capable of delivering chemical agents.
Inspectors recently turned up 16 of them, despite Iraq's recent declaration denying their existence.
Saddam Hussein has not accounted for the remaining 29,984 of these prohibited munitions.
He has given no evidence that he has destroyed them.
From three Iraqi defectors we know that Iraq, in the late 1990s, had several mobile biological weapons labs.
These are designed to produce germ warfare agents, and can be moved from place to place to evade inspectors.
Saddam Hussein has not disclosed these facilities.
He has given no evidence that he has destroyed them.
The International Atomic Energy Agency confirmed in the 1990s that Saddam Hussein had an advanced nuclear weapons development program, had a design for a nuclear weapon, and was working on five different methods of enriching uranium for a bomb.
The British government has learned that Saddam Hussein recently sought significant quantities of uranium from Africa.
Our intelligence sources tell us that he has attempted to purchase high strength aluminum tubes suitable for nuclear weapons production.
Saddam Hussein has not credibly explained these activities.
He clearly has much to hide.
The dictator of Iraq is not disarming.
To the contrary, he is deceiving.
From intelligence sources, we know, for instance, that thousands of Iraqi security personnel are at work hiding documents and materials from the UN inspectors - sanitizing inspection sites, and monitoring the inspectors themselves.
Iraqi officials accompany the inspectors in order to intimidate witnesses.
Iraq is blocking U-2 surveillance flights requested by the United Nations.
Iraqi intelligence officers are posing as the scientists inspectors are supposed to interview.
Real scientists have been coached by Iraqi officials on what to say.
And intelligence sources indicate that Saddam Hussein has ordered that scientists who cooperate with UN inspectors in disarming Iraq will be killed, along with their families.
Year after year, Saddam Hussein has gone to elaborate lengths, spent enormous sums, taken great risks, to build and keep weapons of mass destruction - but why?
The only possible explanation, the only possible use he could have for those weapons, is to dominate, intimidate, or attack.
With nuclear arms or a full arsenal of chemical and biological weapons, Saddam Hussein could resume his ambitions of conquest in the Middle East, and create deadly havoc in the region.
And this Congress and the American people must recognize another threat.
Evidence from intelligence sources, secret communications, and statements by people now in custody, reveal that Saddam Hussein aids and protects terrorists, including members of al-Qaida.
Secretly, and without fingerprints, he could provide one of his hidden weapons to terrorists, or help them develop their own.
Before September 11, 2001, many in the world believed that Saddam Hussein could be contained.
But chemical agents and lethal viruses and shadowy terrorist networks are not easily contained.
Imagine those 19 hijackers with other weapons, and other plans - this time armed by Saddam Hussein.
It would take just one vial, one canister, one crate slipped into this country to bring a day of horror like none we have ever known.
We will do everything in our power to make sure that day never comes.
Some have said we must not act until the threat is imminent.
Since when have terrorists and tyrants announced their intentions, politely putting us on notice before they strike?
If this threat is permitted to fully and suddenly emerge, all actions, all words, and all recriminations would come too late.
Trusting in the sanity and restraint of Saddam Hussein is not a strategy, and it is not an option.
This dictator, who is assembling the world's most dangerous weapons, has already used them on whole villages - leaving thousands of his own citizens dead, blind, or disfigured.
Iraqi refugees tell us how forced confessions are obtained - by torturing children while their parents are made to watch.
International human rights groups have catalogued other methods used in the torture chambers of Iraq: electric shock, burning with hot irons, dripping acid on the skin, mutilation with electric drills, cutting out tongues, and rape.
If this is not evil, then evil has no meaning.
And tonight I have a message for the brave and oppressed people of Iraq: Your enemy is not surrounding your country - your enemy is ruling your country.
And the day he and his regime are removed from power will be the day of your liberation.
The world has waited 12 years for Iraq to disarm.
America will not accept a serious and mounting threat to our country, our friends, and our allies.
The United States will ask the UN Security Council to convene on February 5th to consider the facts of Iraq's ongoing defiance of the world.
Secretary of State Powell will present information and intelligence about Iraq's illegal weapons programs; its attempts to hide those weapons from inspectors; and its links to terrorist groups.
We will consult, but let there be no misunderstanding: If Saddam Hussein does not fully disarm, for the safety of our people, and for the peace of the world, we will lead a coalition to disarm him.
Tonight I also have a message for the men and women who will keep the peace, members of the American Armed Forces: Many of you are assembling in and near the Middle East, and some crucial hours may lie ahead.
In those hours, the success of our cause will depend on you.
Your training has prepared you.
Your honor will guide you.
You believe in America, and America believes in you.
Sending Americans into battle is the most profound decision a president can make.
The technologies of war have changed.
The risks and suffering of war have not.
For the brave Americans who bear the risk, no victory is free from sorrow.
This Nation fights reluctantly, because we know the cost, and we dread the days of mourning that always come.
We seek peace.
We strive for peace.
And sometimes peace must be defended.
A future lived at the mercy of terrible threats is no peace at all.
If war is forced upon us, we will fight in a just cause and by just means - sparing, in every way we can, the innocent.
And if war is forced upon us, we will fight with the full force and might of the United States military - and we will prevail.
And as we and our coalition partners are doing in Afghanistan, we will bring to the Iraqi people food, and medicines, and supplies...and freedom.
Many challenges, abroad and at home, have arrived in a single season.
In two years, America has gone from a sense of invulnerability to an awareness of peril...from bitter division in small matters to calm unity in great causes.
And we go forward with confidence, because this call of history has come to the right country.
Americans are a resolute people, who have risen to every test of our time.
Adversity has revealed the character of our country, to the world, and to ourselves.
America is a strong Nation, and honorable in the use of our strength.
We exercise power without conquest, and sacrifice for the liberty of strangers.
Americans are a free people, who know that freedom is the right of every person and the future of every nation.
The liberty we prize is not America's gift to the world, it is God;s gift to humanity.
We Americans have faith in ourselves - but not in ourselves alone.
We do not claim to know all the ways of Providence, yet we can trust in them, placing our confidence in the loving God behind all of life, and all of history.
May He guide us now, and may God continue to bless the United States of America.
Thank you. 