EXPLANATORY NOTICE.* 

The North American Republic consists of 
twenty-four regularly organized States, and an 
immense extent of territory not yet formed 
into States, which, with the exception of some 
mountain ridges, is wholly susceptible of cul- 
tivation. It contains upwards of two millions 
of square miles, and is therefore thirteen times 
as large as France, twenty-three times as large 
as England, and would, were it peopled as 
densely as these countries, contain FOUR HUN- 
DRED MILLIONS OF PEOPLE. It is watered on its 
eastern, western, and part of its southern sides 
by the ocean, and on part of its northern 
frontier by immense lakes. It is intersected in 



*This clear and concise statement of the origin 
of the American war for independence is from an 
edition of Common Sense published in 1848 by 
J. Watson, 3 Queen's Head Passage, Paternoster 
Row, London. At that time the English publish- 
ers were permitted to print Paine's political 
"writings unmutilated, as they now appear, with- 
out molestation by the government: but the 
early editions of both Common' Sense and the 
Rights of Man were issued in a very imperfect 
form to avoid prosecution; all adverse criticism 
of the king or parliament, of tyrants and tyr- 
anny, being- sternly suppressed. The vacant lines 
in the pages of the edition of Common Serree 
published by J. Almon, opposite Burlington- 
house in Piccadilly, 1776, and the many sup- 
pressed passages in the Rights of Man published 
by H. D. Symonds, Paternoster-Row, 1792, of 
J. S. Jordon, 166 Fleet-street, 1791, and many 
others, are all mute yet eloquent witnesses of 
the injustice and tyranny exercised by the British government in the 18th century. Am. Pub. 



4 COMMON SENSE 

all directions by magnificent rivers, and has 
more facilities for water conveyance than any 
other continental country; it abounds in mines 
and minerals, and produces everything neces- 
sary for the sustenance and enjoyment of man- 
kind. 

The population of the United States has 
been several times doubled in periods of less 
than twenty-five years, it now contains up- 
wards of twelve millions of people, and bids 
fair at no very distant period to be more popu- 
lous and powerful than any nation ever was. 

Such is the present state, and such the pros- 
pects of a nation originally settled by men who 
either ftedj from religious intolerance and per- 
secution to seek peace in the wilderness by 
men whose notions of liberty were too high to 
permit them to endure the tyranny they were 
subjected to at home, or by men who sought 
their fortunes as commercial speculators or 
cultivators of the land. From Britons thus 
circumstanced has sprung a people who have 
increased in number, wealth, and intelligence 
with a rapidity of which history furnishes no 
parallel. 

Prom the time that the commerce of the 
North American Colonies became worth the 
notice of the British Government, it was put 
under the most pernicious and absurd re- 
straints, for the supposed advantage of the 
mother country, and laws were occasionally 
passed here to regulate their internal affairs. 

In the war which preceded the peace of 1762. 
the Colonists took a very decided part, and 
greatly contributed to the conquests made from 



COMMON SENSE 5 

the French. Canada, which had been taken 
from that people, was retained by the British, 
and Florida was ceded to us by Spain. Thus 
secured from attack by foreign neighbors, 
Great Britain and her Colonies were more than 
ever attached to each other. The Americans 
were proud of the land of their ancestors and 
gloried in their descent from Englishmen. This 
state of harmony was, however, of short dura- 
tion. The unexampled expenses of war re- 
quired additional taxes to a large amount, and 
the difficulty this occasioned led the govern- 
ment in 1764 seriously to contemplate the levy- 
ing of taxes in the colonies. This was objected 
to by the colonists, unless they were permitted 
to send representatives to the British Parlia- 
ment; to this the government would not con- 
sent, and a dispute commenced which ended in 
the separation of the two countries. 

Some at least if not all the colonies contend- 
ed that they possessed every legislative power 
not surrendered by compact: whilst in Britain 
it was contended on the part of the govern- 
ment that "Parliament possessed the power of 
binding them in all cases whatever/' 

The dispute became serious, but so contemp- 
tible was the power of the colonists considered 
in the eyes of the English government that in 
a debate in the House of Commons General 
Grant, who should have known better, de- 
clared that "with five regiments of infantry 
lie would undertake to traverse the whole coun- 
try and drive the inhabitants from one end of 
it to the other." This contempt was not only 
entertained by the government and its adher- 



6 COMMON SENSE 

ents, but by the people, who were eager to 
compel their American brethren to submission 
by force of arms, against which the voice of a 
few wise men was of no avail. Th*e colonists 
continuing to refuse the unconditional submis- 
sion demanded, recourse was had to arms, and 
on the night of the 18th of April, 1775, they 
were attacked by the king's troops at Lexing- 
ton, and here the first American blood was 
spilt by their English brethren. The Ameri- 
cans repelled the aggression, appointed GEORGE 
WASHINGTON Commander-in-chief, and a des- 
ultory civil war desolated the colonies. The 
people were undecided in opinion, some were 
for submission, and others who deprecated the 
conduct of government, and publicly declared 
their detestation, disapproved of resistance as 
useless, and few were disposed to risk their 
lives and property in a contest of which none 
appeared able to foretell the consequences. The 
doctrine of independence was a novelty hither- 
to but slightly advocated by its friends, and 
they, from the want of numbers and the timid- 
ity always attendant on newly-started notions, 
were looked upon as rash and dangerous, or 
teacherous and designing men, more deserv- 
ing of suspicion and censure than of applause 
and imitation. 

It was in this crisis, this interval between 
fear and principle, that Thomas Paine, then 
unknown as a public character, published the 
pamphlet Common Sense.* Taking a broader 



*"At the close of the year 1775," says Calvin 
Blanoliard in his Life of Paine, "when the Amer- 
ican Revolution had progressed as far as the 



COMMON SENSE 7 

and longer view than his contemporaries, see- 
ing the inevitable consequence of submission, 

battles of Lexington- and Bunker Hill, John 
Adams, Benjamin Rush, Benjamin Franklin, aifd 
George Washington, had met together to read 
the terrible dispatches they had received. Hav- 
ing done which, they pause in gloom and silence. 
Presently Franklin speaks: 'What, he asks, *is 
to be the end of all this? Is it to obtain justice 
of Great Britain, to change the ministry, to 

soften a tax? Or is it for' He paused; the 

word independence yet choked the bravest throat 
that sought to utter it. 

"At this critical moment, Paine enters. Frank- 
lin introduces him, an-d he takes his seat. He 
well knows the cause of the prevailing gloom, 
and breaks the deep skence thus: 'These States 
of America must be independent of England. 
ThatJs the only solution of this question!' They 
all rise to their feet at this political blasphemy. 
But, nothing daunted, he goes on-; his eye lights 
up with patriotic fire as he paints the glorious 
destiny which America, considering her vast re- 
sources, ought to achieve, and adjures them to 
lend their influence to rescue the Western Con- 
tinent from the absurd, unnatural, an-d unpro- 
gressive predicament of being governed by a 
small island, three thousand miles off. Wash- 
ington leaped forward, and taking both his 
hands, besought him to publish these views in a 
book. 

"Paine went to his room, seized his pen-, lost 
sight of every other object, toiled incessantly, 
and in December, 1775, the work entitled Com- 
mon Sense, which caused the Declaration of In- 
dependence, and brought both people and their 
leaders face to face with the work they had to 
accomplish, was sent forth on its mission. 'That 
book,' says Dr. Rush, 'burst forth from the press 
with an effect that has been rarely produced by 
types and paper, in any age or country.' 

" 'Have you seen the pamphlet. Common Sense?' 
asked 'Major General Lee, in a letter to Washing- 
ton: 'I never saw such a masterly, irresistible 



8 COMMON SENSE 

the probable result of a declaration of inde- 
pendence, correctly appreciating the reasons 
which could be urged on either side, and pre- 
eminently possessing the power of clearly 
stating what he strongly conceived, he ad- 
dressed himself to the Americans in language 
which every one could understand, and none 
could successfully controvert. This remarkable 
and inestimable production may be described 
from the anathemas of the enemies of liberty. 
It has received the highest possible praise from 
the pen of CheBtham, one of Thomas Paine's 
most venal and shameless calumniators, who 
thus characterizes the work: 

'This pamphlet of foVty-seven octavo pages, 
holding out relief by proposing INDEPENDENCE 
to an oppressed and despairing people, was 
published in January, 1776. Speaking a Ian- 
gauge which the colonists had felt, but not 
thought, its popularity, terrible in its conse- 
quences to the mother country, was unexam- 
pled in the history of the press. At first in- 
volving the colonists, it was thought, in the 
crime of rebellion, and pointing to a road lead- 
ing inevitably to ruin, it was read with alarm 
and indignation, but when the reader (and 

performance. It will, if I mistake not, in con- 
currence with the transcendent folly and wick- 
edness of the ministry, give the coup-de-gract- 
to Great Britain. In short, I own myself con- 
vinced by the arguments, of the necessity of 
separation/ 

"The tribute of Paine's greatest enemy was in 
these words: 'The cannon of Washington was 
not more formidable to the British than the pen 
of the author of Common Sense.' " Am. Pub. 



COMMON SENSE > 

everybody read it), recovering from the first 
shock, re-perused it, its arguments, ravishing 
his feelings and appealing to his pride, re- 
animated his hopes and satisfied his under- 
standing, that Common Sense, backed by the 
resources and force of the colonies, poor and 
feeble as they were, could alone rescue them 
from the unqualified oppression with which 
they were threatened. The unknown author, 
in the moments of enthusiasm which succeeded, 
was hailed as an angel sent from heaven to 
save from all the horrors of slavery, by his 
timely, powerful, and unerring councils, a 
faithful but abused, a brave but misrepre- 
sented people. 

"When Common Sense arrived at Albany, the 
Convention of New York was sitting there. 
General Scott, a leading member, alarmed at 
the boldness and novelty oft its arguments, 
mentioned his fears to several of his distin- 
guished colleagues, and suggested a private 
meeting in the evening, for the purpose of 
writing an answer. They accordingly met, and 
Mr.' McThesson read the pamphlet through. 
At first it was deemed necessary and expedi- 
ent to answer it without delay, but casting 
about for the requisite arguments, they con- 
cluded to adjourn and meet again. In a few 
evenings they re-assembled, but so rapid was 
the change of opinion in the colonies at large 
in favor of independence, that they agreed not 
to oppose it." 

Dr. Gordon in his History of the American 
Revolution writes thus, "The publications which 
have appeared have greatly promoted the spirit 



10 COMMON SENSE 

of independence, but no one so much as_ the 
pamphlet under the signature of Common 
Sense, written hy Thomas Paine, an English- 
man. Nothing could have been better timed* 
than this performance it has produced aston- 
ishing efects." 

Testimonies of this sort from friends and 
enemies could easily be multiplied, and proofs 
almost without end could be adduced to show 
how much the cause of mankind was promoted 
by Thomas Paine in thus assisting to lay the 
foundation of the American Republic, the ex- 
ample of which will in time be followed by 
every people on the earth. 



*"Paine was the first to advise the Americans 
to assert their independence," says Richard Car- 
lile in his Life of Paine. "This he did in his fam- 
ous pamphlet, entitled Common Sense, which, for 
its consequences and rapid effect, was the most 
important production that ever issued from the 
press. This pamphlet appeared at the commence- 
ment of the year 1776, and electrified the minds 
of the oppressed Americans. They had not ven- 
tured to harbor the idea of independence, and 
they dreaded war so much as to be anxious for 
reconciliation with Britain. One incident which 
gave a stimulus to the pamphlet Common Sense 
was, that it happened to appear on the very day 
that the King of England's speech reached the 
United States, in which the Americans were de- 
nounced as rebels and traitors, and in which 
speech it was asserted to be the right of the 
legislature of England to bind the Colonies in 
all cases whatsoever! Such menace and asser- 
tion as this could not fail to kindle the ire of 
the Americanos, and Common Sense came for- 
ward to touch their feelings with the spirit of 
independence in the very nick of time." Am. 
Pub. 



COMMON SENSE 11 

The principles maintained in Common Sense 
are applicable to all times, and to all mankind. 
They should be carefully studied by every one 
who is at all desirous to possess that informa- 
tion without which he must ever remain a 
slave at heart,f 



fPaine's own opinion of Common Sense may be 
inferred from the fact, that previous to hLn 
death he directed that his body should be in- 
terred on his farm at New Rochelle, and a plain 
ston-e placed over his grave bearing this inscrip- 
tion: 

THOMAS PAINE, 

AUTHOR OP 
COMMON SENSE 



COMMON SENSE 






COMMON SENSE. 1 

Thomas Paine. 

INTRODUCTION. 

PERHAPS the sentiments contained in the fol- 
lowing pages, are not yet sufficiently fashion- 
able to procure them general Favor; a long 
Habit of not thinking a Thing wrong, gives 
it a superficial appearance of being right, and 
raises at first a formidable outcry in defense 
of Custom. But the Tumult soon subsides. 
Time makes more Converts than Reason. 

As a long and violent abuse of power is gen- 
erally the means of calling the right of it in 
question (and in matters too which might never 



pamphlet, whose effect has never been 
paralleled in literary history, was published 
January 10, 1776, with the following title: 

Common Sense: Addressed to the Inhabitants 
of America, on the following- Interesting Sub- 
jects, viz.: I. Of the Origin and Design of Gov- 
ernment in General; with Concise Remarks on 
the English Constitution. II. Of Monarchy and 
Hereditary Succession. III. Thoughts on the 
Present State of American Affairs. IV. Of the 
Present Ability of America; with some Miscel- 
laneous Reflections. 



Man knows no master save creating Heaven, 
Or those whom choice and common good ordain. 

Thomson. 

Philadelphia: Printed, and Sold, by R. Bell, in 
Third Street MDCCLXXVL 



COMMON SENSE 13 

have been thought of, had not the sufferers been 
aggravated into the inquiry,) and as the King 
of England hath undertaken in his own right, 
to support the Parliament in what he calls 
Theirs, and as the good People of this Coun- 
try are grievously oppressed by the Combina- 
tion, they have an undoubted privilege to en- 
quire into the Pretensions of both, and equally 
to reject the Usurpation of either. 

In the following Sheets, the Author hath 
studiously avoided every thing which is per- 
sonal among ourselves. Compliments as well 
as censure to individuals make no part thereof. 
The wise and the worthy need not the triumph 
of a Pamphlet; and those whose sentiments are 
injudicious or unfriendly will cease of them- 
selves, unless too much pains is bestowed upon 
their conversions. 

The cause of America is in a great measure 
the cause of all mankind. Many circumstances 
have, and will arise, which are not local, but 
universal, and through which the principles of 
all lovers of mankind are affected, and in the 
event of which their affections are interested. 
The laying a country desolate with fire and 
sword, declaring war against the natural rights 
of all mankind, and extirpating the defenders 
thereof from the face of the earth, is the con- 
cern of every ifian to whom nature hath given 
the power of feeling; of which class, regardless 
of party censure, is 

THE AUTHOR. 



14 COMMON SENSE 



Postscript to Preface in the third edition. 

P. S. The Publication of this new Edition 
hath been delayed, with a view of taking notice 
(had it been necessary) of any attempt to re- 
fute the Doctrine of Independence: As no an- 
swer hath yet appeared, it is now presumed that 
none will, the time needful for getting such a 
Performance ready for the Public being consid- 
erably past. 

Who the Author of this Production is, Is 
wholly unnecessary to the Public, as the Ob- 
ject for Attention is the Doctrine itself, not the 
Man. Yet it may not be unnecessary to say, 
That he is unconnected with any party, and 
under no sort of Influence, public or private, 
but the influence of reason and principle. 

Philadelphia, February 14, 1776. 



COMMON SENSE 15 



COMMON SENSE. 

ON THE ORIGIN AND DESIGN OF GOVERNMENT 

IN GENERAL, WITH CONCISE REMARKS 

ON THE ENGLISH CONSTITUTION. 

SOME writers have so confounded society 
with government, as to leave little or no dis- 
tinction between them; whereas they are not 
only different, but have different origins. So- 
ciety is produced by our wants, and govern- 
ment by our wickedness; the former promotes 
our happiness positively by uniting our affec- 
tions, the latter negatively by restraining our 
vices. The one encourages intercourse, the 
other creates distinctions. The first is a pa- 
tron, the last a punisher. 

Society in every state is a blessing, but Gov- 
ernment, even in its best state, is but a neces- 
sary evil; in its worst state an intolerable one: 
for when we suffer, or are exposed to the same 
miseries by a Government, which we might ex- 
pect in a country without Government, our ca- 
lamity is heightened by reflecting that we fur- 
nish the means by which we suffer.. Govern- 
ment, like dress, is the badge of lost innocence; 
the palaces of kings are built upon the ruins 
of the bowers of paradise. For were the im- 
pulses of conscience clear, uniform and irre- 
sistibly obeyed, man would need no other law- 
giver; but that nor being the case, he finds 



16 COMMON SENSE 

it necessary to surrender up a part of his prop- 
erty to furnish means for the protection of 
the rest; and this he is induced to do by the 
same prudence which in every other case ad- 
vises him, out of two evils to choose the least. 
Wherefore, security being the true design and 
end of government, it unanswerably follows 
that whatever form thereof appears most likely 
to ensure it to us, with the least expense and 
greatest benefit, is preferable to all others. 

In order to gain a clear and just idea of the 
design and end of government, let us suppose 
a small number of persons settled in some se- 
questered part of the earth, unconnected with 
the rest; they will then represent the first peo- 
pling of any country, or of the world. In this 
state of natural liberty, society will be their 
first thought. A thousand motives will ex- 
cite them thereto; the strength of one man 
is so unequal to his wants, and his mind so 
unfitted for perpetual solitude, that he is soon 
obliged to seek assistance arid relief of an- 
other, who in his turn requires the same. Pour 
or five united would be able to raise a toler- 
able dwelling in the midst of a wilderness, but 
one man might labour out the common period 
of life without accomplishing any thing; when 
he had felled his timber he could not remove 
it, nor erect it after it was removed; hunger 
in the mean time would urge him to quit his 
work, and every different want would call him 
a different way. Disease, nay even misfortune, 
would be death; for though neither might be 
mortal, yet either would disable him from liv- 
ing, and reduce him to a state in which he 



COMMON SENSE 17 

might rather be said to perish than to die. 

Thus necessity, like a gravitating power, 
would soon form our newly arrived emigrants 
into society, the reciprocal blessings of which 
would supercede, and render the obligations of 
law and government unnecessary while they 
remained perfectly just to each other; but as 
nothing but Heaven is impregnable to vice, it 
will unavoidably happen that in proportion as 
they surmount the first difficulties of emi- 
gration, which bound them together in a com- 
mon cause, they will begin to relax in their 
duty and attachment to each other: and this 
remissness will point out the necessity of es- 
tablishing some form of government to supply 
the defect of moral virtue. 

Some convenient tree will afford them a State 
House, under the branches of which the whole 
Colony may assemble to deliberate on public 
matters. It is more than probable that their 
first laws will have the title only of Regula- 
tions and be enforced by no other penalty than 
public disesteem. In this first parliament every 
man by natural right will have a seat. 

But as the Colony encreases, the public con- 
cerns will encrease likewise, and the distance 
at which the members may be separated, will 
render it too inconvenient for all of them to 
meet on every occasion as at first, when their 
number was small, their habitations near, and 
the public concerns few and trifling. This will 
point out the convenience of their consenting 
to leave the legislative part to be managed 
by a select number chosen from the whole 
body, who are supposed to have the same con- 



18 COMMON SENSE 

cerns at stake which those have who appointed 
them, and who will act in the same manner 
as the whole body would act were they pres- 
ent. If the colony continue encreasing, it will 
become necessary to augment the number of 
representatives, and that the interest of every 
part of the colony may be attended to, it will 
be found best to divide the whole into con- 
venient parts, each part sending its proper 
number: and that the elected might never form 
to themselves an interest separate from the 
electors, prudence will point out the propriety 
of having elections often: because as the elected 
might by that means return and mix again 
with the general body of the electors in a few 
months, their fidelity to the public will be se- 
cured by the prudent reflection of not mak- 
ing a rod for themselves. And as this frequent 
interchange will establish a common interest 
with every part of the community, they will 
mutually and naturally support each other, and 
on this, (not on the unmeaning name of king,) 
depends the strength of government, and the 
happiness of the governed. 

Here then is the origin and rise of govern- 
ment; namely, a mode rendered necessary by 
the inability of moral virtue to govern the 
world; here too is the design and end of govern- 
ment, viz. Freedom and security. And however 
our eyes may be dazzled with show, or our 
ears deceived by sound; however prejudice may 
warp our wills, or interest darken our under- 
standing, the simple voice of nature and rea- 
son will say, 'tis right. 

I draw my idea of the form of government 



COMMON SENSE 19 

from a principle in nature which no art can 
overturn, viz. that the more simple any thing 
is, the less liable it is to be disordered, and 
the easier repaired when disordered; and with 
this maxim in view I offer a few remarks on 
the so much boasted constitution of England. 
That it was noble for the dark and slavish 
times in which it was erected, is granted. When 
the world was overrun with tyranny the least 
remove therefrom was a glorious rescue. But 
that it is imperfect, subject to convulsions, and 
incapable of producing what it seems to prom- 
ise, is easily demonstrated. 

Absolute governments, (tho* the disgrace of 
human nature) have this advantage with them, 
they are simple; if the people suffer, they know 
the head from which their suffering springs; 
know likewise the remedy; and are not be- 
wildered by a variety of causes and cures. But 
the constitution of England is so exceedingly 
complex, that the nation may suffer for years 
together without being able to discover in 
which part the fault lies; some will say in one 
and some in another, and every political phy- 
sician will advise a different medicine. 

I know it is difficult to get over local or 
long standing prejudices, yet if we will suf- 
fer ourselves to examine the component parts 
of the English constitution, we shall find them 
to be the base remains of two ancient tyrannies, 
compounded with some new Republican ma- 
terials. 

First. The remains of Monarchical tyranny 
in the person of the King. 



20 COMMON SENSE 

Secondly. The remains of Aristocratical ty- 
ranny in the persons of the Peers. 

Thirdly. The new Republican materials, in 
the persons of the Commons, on whose virtue 
depends the freedom of England. 

The two first, by being hereditary, are inde- 
pendent of the People; wherefore in a con- 
stitutional sense they contribute nothing to- 
wards the freedom of the State. 

To say that the constitution of England is 
an union of three powers, reciprocally checking 
each other, is farcical; either the words have 
no meaning, or they are flat contradictions. 

To say that the Commons is a check upon 
the King, presupposes two things. 

First. That the King it not to be trusted 
without being looked after; or in other words, 
that a thirst for absolute power is the natural 
disease of monarchy. 

Secondly That the Commons, by being ap- 
pointed for that purpose, are either wiser or 
more worthy of confidence than the Crown. 

But as the same constitution which gives the 
Commons a power to check the King by with- 
holding the supplies, gives afterwards the King 
a power to check the Commons, by empower- 
ing him to reject their other bills; it again 
supposes that the King is wiser than those 
whom it has already supposed to be wiser than 
him. A mere absurdity! 

There is something exceedingly ridiculous in 
the composition of Monarchy; it first excludes 
a man from the means of information, yet em- 
powers him to act in cases where the highest 
judgment is required. The state of a king shuts 



COMMON SENSE 21 

him from the World, yet the business of a king 
requires him to know it thoroughly; wherefore 
the different parts, by unnaturally opposing and 
destroying each other, prove the whole charac- 
ter to be absurd and useless. 

Some writers have explained the English 
constitution thus: the King, say they, is one, 
the people another; the Peers are a house in 
behalf of the King, the commons in behalf of 
the people; but this hath all the distinctions 
of a house divided against itself; and though 
the expressions be pleasantly arranged, yet 
when examined they appear idle and ambigu- 
ous; and it will always happen, that the nic- 
est construction that words are capable of, when 
applied to the description of something which 
either cannot exist, or is too incomprehensible 
to be within the compass of description, will b* 
words of sound only, and though they may 
amuse the ear, they cannot inform the mind: 
for this explanation includes a previous ques- 
tion, viz. how came the king by a power which 
the people are afraid to trust, and always 
obliged to check? Such a power could not be 
the gift of a wise people, neither can any power, 
which needs checking, be from God; yet the 
provision which the constitution makes sup- 
poses such a power to exist. 

But the provision is unequal to the task; the 
means either cannot or will not accomplish 
the end, and the whole affair is a Felo de se: 
for as the greater weight will always carry 
up the less, and as all the wheels of a machine 
are put in motion by one, it only remains to 
know which power in the constitution has the 



22 COMMON &ENSE 

most weight, for that will govern: a^ti tho' the 
others, or a part of them, may clog, or, as the 
phrase is, check the rapidity of its motion, yet 
so long as they cannot stop it, their endeavours 
will be ineffectual: The first moving power 
will at last have its way, and what it wants 
in speed is supplied by time. 

That the crown is this overbearing part in 
the English constitution needs not be men- 
tioned, and that it derives its whole conse- 
quence merely from being the giver of places 
and pensions is self-evident; wherefore, though 
we have been wise enough to shut and lock a 
door against absolute Monarchy, we at the 
same time have been foolish enough to put the 
Crown in possession of the key. 

The prejudice of Englishmen, in favour of 
their own government, by King, Lords and Com- 
mons, arises as much or more from national 
pride than reason. Individuals are undoubtedly 
safer in England than in some other countries: 
but the will of the king is as much the law of 
the land in Britain as in France, with this 
difference, that instead of proceeding directly 
from his mouth, it is handed to the people un- 
der the formidable shape of an act of parlia- 
ment. For the fate of Charles the First hath 
only made kings more subtle not more just. 

Wherefore, laying aside all national pride and 
prejudice in favour of modes and forms, the 
plain truth is that it is wholly owing to the 
constitution of the people, and not to the con- 
stitution of the government that the crown is 
not as oppressive in England as in Turkey. 

An inquiry into the constitutional errors in 



COMMON SENSE 23 

the English form of government, is at this time 
highly necessary; for as we are never in a 
proper condition of doing justice to others, 
while we continue under the influence of some 
leading partiality, so neither are we capable of 
doing it to ourselves while we remain fettered 
by any obstinate prejudice. And as a man who 
is attached to a prostitute is unfitted to choose 
or judge of a wife, so any prepossession in fa- 
vour of a rotten constitution of government will 
disable us from discerning a good one.' 

OF MONARCHY AND HEREDITARY SUCCESSION. 

MANKIND being originally equals in the order 
of creation, the equality could only be destroyed 
by some subsequent circumstance: the distinc- 
tions of rich and poor may in a great measure 
be accounted for, and that without having re- 
course to the harsh ill-sounding names of 
oppression and avarice. Oppression is often the 
consequence, but seldom or never the means 
of riches; and tho* avarice will preserve a man 
from being necessitously poor, it generally 
makes him too timorous to be wealthy. 

But there is another and great distinction for 
which no truly natural or religious reason can 
be assigned, and that is the distinction of men 
into KINGS and SUBJECTS. Male and female are 
the distinctions of nature, good and bad the 
distinctions of Heaven; but how a race of men 
came into the world so exalted above the rest, 
and distinguished like some new species, is 
worth inquiring into, and whether they are 
the means of happiness or of misery to man- 
kind. 



24 COMMON SENSE 

In the early ages of the world, according to 
the scripture chronology there were no kings; 
the consequence of which was, there were no 
wars; it is the pride of kings which throws 
mankind into confusion. Holland, without a 
king hath enjoyed more peace for this last 
century than any of the monarchical govern- 
ments in Europe. Antiquity favours the same 
remark; for the quiet and rural lives of the 
first Patriarchs have a snappy something in 
them, which vanishes when we come to the his- 
tory of Jewish royalty. 

Government by kings was first introduced 
into the world by the Heathens, from whom the 
children of Israel copied the custom. It was 
the most prosperous invention the Devil ever 
set on foot for the promotion of idolatry. The 
Heathens paid divine honours to their deceased 
kings, and the Christian World hath improved 
on the plan by doing the same to their living 
ones. How impious is the title of sacred Maj- 
esty applied to a worm, who in the midst of his 
splendor is crumbling into dust! 

As the exulting one man so greatly above the 
rest cannot be justified on the equal rights of 
nature, so neither can it be defended on the 
authority of scripture; for the will of the Al- 
mighty as declared by Gideon, and the prophet 
Samuel, expressly disapproves of government 
by Kings. All anti-monarchical parts of scrip- 
ture, have been very smoothly glossed over ii. 
monarchical governments, but they undoubtedly 
merit the attention of countries which have 
their governments yet to form. Render unto 
Cesar the things which are Cesar's, is the scrip- 



COMMON SENSE 15 

ture doctrine of courts, yet it is no support of 
monarchical government, for the Jews at that 
time were without a king, and in a state of 
vassalage to the Romans. 

Near three thousand years passed away, from 
the Mosaic account of the creation, till the Jews 
under a national delusion requested a king. 
Till then their form of government (except in 
extraordinary cases where the Almighty inter- 
posed) was a kind of Republic, administered by 
a judge and the elders of the tribes. Kings they 
had none, and it was held sinful to acknowledge 
any being under that title but the Lord of 
Hosts. And when a man seriously reflects on 
the idolatrous homage which is paid to the per- 
sons of kings, he need not wonder that the Al- 
mighty, ever jealous of his honour, should dis- 
approve a form of government which so Im- 
piously invades the prerogative of Heaven. 

Monarchy is ranked in scripture as one of 
the sins of the Jews, for which a curse in re- 
serve is denounced against them. The history 
of that transaction is worth attending to. 

The children of Israel being oppressed by the 
Midianites, Gideon marched against them with 
a small army, and victory thro* the divine in- 
terposition decided in his favour. The Jews, 
elate with success, and attributing it to the gen- 
eralship of Gideon, proposed making him a 
king, saying, Rule thou over us, thou and thy 
son, and thy son's son. Here was temptation 
in its fullest extent; not a kingdom only, but 
an hereditary one; but Gideon in the piety of 
his soul replied, I will not rule over you, neither 
shall my son rule over you. THE LORD SHALL 



26 COMMON SENSE 

RULE OVER YOU. Words need not be more ex- 
plicit: Gideon doth not decline the honour, but 
denieth their right to give it; neither doth he 
compliment them with invented declarations 
of his thankb, but in the positive style of a 
prophet charges them with disaffection to their 
.proper Sovereign, the King of Heaven. 

About one hundred and thirty years after 
this, they fell again into the same error. The 
hankering which the Jews had for the idol- 
atrous customs of the Heathens, is something 
exceedingly unaccountable; but so it was, that 
laying hold of the misconduct of Samuel's two 
sons, who were intrusted with some secular con- 
cerns, they came in an abrupt and clamorous 
manner to Samuel, saying, Behold tfiou art old, 
and thy sons ivalk not in thy ways, now make 
us a king to judge us like all the other na- 
tions. And here we cannot observe but that 
their motives were bad, viz. that they might 
be like unto other nations, i. e. the Heathens, 
whereas their true glory lay in being as much 
unlike them as possible. But the thing dis- 
pleased Samuel when they said, give us a King 
to judge us; and Samuel prayed unto the Lord, 
and the Lord said unto Samuel, hearken unto 
the voice of the people in all that they say unto 
thee, for they have not rejected thee, but they 
have rejected me, THAT i SHOULD NOT REIGN OVER 
THEM. According to all the works which they 
have done since the day that I brought them 
up out of Egypt even unto this day, wherewith 
they hove forsaken me, and served other Cods: 
,vo flo they also unto thee. Now therefore 
unto their voice, ho-wbcit, protest sol- 



RXSF. 27 

emnly unto them and show them the manner 
of the King that shall reign over them, i. e. not 
of any particular King, but the general manner 
of the Kings of the earth whom Israel was so 
eagerly copying after. And notwithstanding 
the great distance of time and difference of 
manners, the character is still in fashion. And 
Samuel told all the words of the Lord unto the 
people, that asked of him a King. And he said, 
This shall l>e the manner of the King that shall 
reign over you. He will take your sons and ap- 
point them for himself for his chariots and to 
be his horsemen, and some shall run before his 
chariots (this description agrees with the pres- 
ent mode of impressing men) and Tie will ap- 
point Mm captains over thousands and cap- 
tains over fifties, will set them to ear his ground % 
and to reap Jiis harvest, and to make his instru- 
ments of war, and instruments of his chariots, 
And he ivill take your daughters to be confec- 
tionaries, and to be cooks, and to be bakers 
(this describes the expense and luxury as well 
as the oppression of Kings) and he will take 
your fields and your vineyards, and your olive 
yards, even the best of them, and give them to 
his servants. And he will take the tenth of 
your seed, and of your vineyards, and give 
them to his officers and to his servants (by 
which we see that bribery, corruption, and fa- 
vouritism, are the standing vices of Kings) and 
he will ta 7 ce the tenth of your men servants^ 
and your maid servants, and your goodliest 
young men. and your asses, and put them to 
his work: and he will take the tenth of your 
sheep, and ye shall be his servants, and ye shall 



28 COMMON SENSE 

cry out in thai day because of your king which 
ye shall have chosen, AND THE LORD WILL NOT 
HEAR YOU IN THAT DAY. This accounts for the 
continuation of Monarchy; neither do the char- 
acters of the few good kings which have lived 
since, either sanctify the title, or blot out the 
sinfulness of the origin; the high encomium 
of David takes no notice of him officially as a 
King, but only as a man after God's own heart. 
Nevertheless the people refused to obey the 
voice of Samuel, and they said, Nay, but we will 
have a king over us, that we may be like all the 
nations, and that our king may judge us, and 
go out before us and fight our battles. Samuel 
continued to reason with them but to no pur- 
pose; he set before them their ingratitude, but 
all would not avail ; and seeing them fully bent 
" on their folly, he cried out, I will call unto the 
Lord, and he shall send thunder and rain 
(which was then a punishment, being in the 
time of wheat harvest) that ye may perceive 
and see that your wickedness is great which 
ye have done in the sight of the Lord, IN ASK- 
ING YOU A KING. So Samuel called unto the 
Lord, and the Lord sent thunder and rain that 
day, and all the people greatly feared the Lord 
and Samuel. And all the people said unto Sam- 
uel, Pray for thy servants unto the Lord thy 
God that we die not, for WE HAVE ADDED UNTO 

OUR SINS THIS EVIL, TO ASK A KING. These por- 

tions of scripture are direct and positive. They 
admit of no equivocal construction. That the 
Almighty hath here entered his protest against 
monarchical government is true, or the scrip- 
ture is false. And a man hath good reason to 



COMMON SENSE 29 

believe that there is as much of kingcraft as 
priestcraft in withholding the scripture from 
the public in popish countries. For monarchy 
in every instance is the popery of government. 

To the evil of monarchy we have added that 
of hereditary succession; and as the first is a 
degradation and lessening of ourselves, so the 
second, claimed as a matter of right, is an in- 
sult and imposition on posterity. For all men 
being originally equals, no one by birth could 
have a right to set up his own family in per- 
petual preference to all others for ever, and 
tho' himself might deserve some decent degree 
of honours of his contemporaries, yet his de- 
scendants might be far too unworthy to inherit 
them. One of the strongest natural proofs of 
the folly of hereditary right in Kings, is that 
nature disapproves it, otherwise she would not 
so frequently turn it into ridicule, by giving 
mankind an Ass for a Lion. 

Secondly, as no man at first could possess 
any other public honors than were bestowed 
upon him, so the givers of those honors could 
have no power to give away the right of pos- 
terity, and though they might say "We choose 
you for our head," they could not without mani- 
fest injustice to their children say "that your 
children and your children's children shall 
reign over ours forever." Because such an un- 
wise, unjust, unnatural compact might (per- 
haps) in the next succession put them under 
the government of a rogue or a fool. Most wise 
men in their private sentiments have ever 
treated hereditary right with contempt; yet it 
is one of those evils which when once estab- 



30 COMMON SENSE 

lished is not easily removed: many submit from 
fear, others from superstition, and the more 
powerful part shares with the king the plunder 
of the rest. 

This is supposing the present race of kings 
in the world to have had an honorable origin: 
whereas it is more than probable, that, could 
we take off the dark covering of antiquity and 
trace them to their first rise, we should find 
the first of them nothing better than the prin- 
cipal ruffian of some restless gang, whose sav- 
age manners of pre-eminence in subtilty ob- 
tained him the title of chief among plunderers; 
and who by increasing in power and extending 
his depredations, overawed the quiet and de- 
fenseless to purchase their safety by frequent 
contributions. Yet his electors could have no 
idea of giving hereditary right to his descend- 
ants, because such a perpetual exclusion of 
themselves was incompatible with the free and 
restrained principles they professed to live by. 
Wherefore, hereditary succession in the early 
ages of monarchy could not take place as a mat- 
ter of claim, but as something casual or com- 
plemental; but as few or no records were ex- 
tant in those days, the traditionary history 
stuff d with fables, it was very easy, after the 
lapse of a few generations, to trump up some 
superstitious tale conveniently timed, Mahomet- 
like, to cram hereditary right down the throats 
of the vulgar. Perhaps the disorders which 
threatened, or seemed to threaten, on the de- 
cease of a leader and the choice of a new one 
(for elections among ruffians could not be very 
orderly) induced many at first to favour heredi- 



COMMON SENSE SI 

tary pretensions; by which means it happened, 
as it hath happened since, that what at first 
was submitted to as a convenience was after- 
wards claimed as a right. 

England since the conquest hath known some 
few good monarchs, but groaned beneath, a 
much larger number of bad ones: yet no man 
in his senses can say that their claim under 
William the Conqueror is a very honourable 
one. A French bastard landing with an armed 
Banditti and establishing himself king of En- 
gland against the consent of the natives, is in 
plain terms a very paltry rascally original. It 
certainly hath no divinity in it. However it is 
needless to spend much time in exposing the 
folly of hereditary right; if there are any so 
weak as to believe it, let them promiscuously 
worship the Ass and the Lion, and welcome. I 
shall neither copy their humility, nor disturb 
their devotion. 

Yet I should be glad to ask how they suppose 
kings came at first? The question admits but 
of three answers, viz. either by lot, by election, 
or by usurpation. If the first king was taken 
by lot, it establishes a precedent for the next, 
which excludes hereditary succession. Saul 
was by lot, yet the succession was not heredi- 
tary, neither does it appear from that transac- 
tion that there was any intention it ever should. 
If the first king of any country was by election, 
that likewise establishes a precedent for the 
next; for to say, that the right of all future 
generations is taken away, by the act of the 
first electors, in their choice not only of a king 
but of a family of kings for ever, hath no 



32 COMMON SENSfi 

parallel in or out of scripture but the doctrine 
of original sin, which supposes the free will of 
all men lost in Adam; and from such com- 
parison, and it will admit of no other, heredi- 
tary succession can derive no glory. For as in 
Adam all sinned, and as in the first electors 
all men obeyed ; as in the one all mankind were 
subjected to Satan, and in the other to sover- 
eignty; as our innocence was lost in the first, 
and our authority in the last; and as both dis- 
able us from re-assuming some former state and 
privilege, it unanswerably follows that orig- 
inal sin and hereditary succession are parallels. 
Dishonourable rank! inglorious connection! yet 
the most subtle sophist cannot produce a juster 
simile. 

As to usurpation, no man will be so hardy as 
to defend it; and that William the Conqueror 
was an usurper is a fact not to be contradicted. 
The plain truth is, that the antiquity of En- 
glish monarchy will not bear looking into. 

But it is not so much the absurdity as the 
evil of hereditary succession which concerns 
mankind. Did it ensure a race of good and 
wise men it would have the seal of divine au- 
thority, but as it opens a door to the foolish, 
the wicked, and the improper, it hath in it 
the nature of oppression. Men who look upon 
themselves born to reign, and others to obey, 
soon grow insolent. Selected from the rest of 
mankind, their minds are early poisoned by 
importance; and the world they act in differs 
so materially from the world at large, that they 
have but little opportunity of knowing its true 
interests, and when they succeed to the govern- 



COMMON SENSE 83 

ment are frequently the most ignorant and un- 
fit of any throughout the dominions. 

Another evil which attends hereditary suc- 
cession is, that the throne is subject to be pos- 
sessed by a minor at any age; all which time 
the regency acting under the cover of a king 
have every opportunity and inducement to be- 
tray their trust. The same national misfor- 
tune happens when a king worn out with age 
and infirmity enters the last stage of human 
weakness. In both these cases the public be- 
comes a prey to every miscreant who can tam- 
per successfully with the follies either of age 
or infancy. 

The most plausible plea which hath ever been 
offered in favor of hereditary succession is, 
that it preserves a nation from civil wars; and 
were this true, it would be weighty; whereas it 
is the most bare-faced falsity ever imposed 
upon mankind. The whole history of England 
disowns the fact. Thirty kings and two minors 
have reigned in that distracted kingdom since 
the conquest, in which time there has been (in- 
cluding the revolution) no less than eight civil 
wars and nineteen Rebellions. Wherefore in- 
stead of making for peace, it makes against it, 
and destroys the very foundation it seems to 
stand upon. 

The contest for monarchy and succession, be- 
tween the houses of York and Lancaster, laid 
England in a scene of blood for many years. 
Twelve pitched battles besides skirmishes and 
sieges were fought between Henry and Edward. 
Twice was Henry prisoner to Edward, who in 
his turn was prisoner to Henry. And so un- 



24 

certain 13 the fate of war and the temper of a 
nation, when nothing but personal matters are 
the ground of a quarrel, that Henry was taken 
in triumph from a prison to a palace, and Ed- 
ward obliged to fly from a palace to a foreign 
land; yet, as sudden transitions of temper are 
seldom lasting, Henry in his turn was driven 
from the throne, and Edward re-called to suc- 
ceed him. The parliament always following the 
strongest side. 

This contest began in the reign of Henry the 
Sixth, and was not entirely extinguished till 
Henry the Seventh, in whom the families were 
united. Including a period of 67 years, viz. 
from 1422 to 1489. 

In short, monarchy and succession have laid 
(not this or that kingdom only) but the world 
in blood and ashes. 'Tis a form of government 
which the word of God bears testimony against, 
and blood will attend it. 

If we enquire into the business of a King, 
we shall find that in some countries they may 
have none; and after sauntering away their 
lives without pleasure to themselves or ad- 
vantage to the nation, withdraw from the scene, 
and leave their successors to tread the same idle 
round. In absolute monarchies the whole 
weight of business civil and military lies on the 
King; the children of Israel in their request 
for a king urged this plea, "that he may judge 
us, and go out before us and fight our battles." 
But in countries where he is neither a Judge 
nor a General, as in England, a man would be 
puzzled to know what is his business. 

The nearer any government approaches to a 



COMMON SENSE 35 

Republic, the less business there is for a King. 
It is somewhat difficult to find a proper name 
for the government of England. Sir William 
Meredith calls it a Republic; but in its present 
state it is unworthy of the name, because the 
corrupt influence of the Crown, by having all 
the places in its disposal, hath so effectually 
swallowed up the power, and eaten out the 
virtue of the House of Commons (the Repub- 
lican part in the constitution) that the govern- 
ment of England is nearly as monarchical as 
that of France or Spain. Men fall out with 
names without understanding them. For 'tis 
the Republican and not the Monarchical part 
of the Constitution of England which English- 
men glory in, viz. the liberty of choosing an 
House of Commons from out of their own body 
and it is easy to see that when Republican 
virtues fail, slavery ensues. Why is the con- 
stitution of England sickly, but because mon- 
archy hath poisoned the Republic; the Crown 
hath engrossed the Commons. 

In England a King hath little more to do 
than to make war and give away places; which, 
in plain terms, is to empoverish the nation 
and set it together by the ears. A pretty busi- 
ness indeed for a man to be allowed eight hun- 
dred thousand sterling a year for, and wor- 
shipped into the bargain! Of more worth is 
one honest man to society, and in the sight of 
God, than all the crowned ruffians that ever 
lived. 



36 COMMON {SE 



THOUGHTS ON THE PRESENT STATE OF 
AMERICAN AFFAIRS. 

IN the following pages I offer nothing more 
than simple facts, plain arguments, and com- 
mon sense: and have no other preliminaries to 
settle with the reader, than that he will divest 
himself of prejudice and prepossession, and 
suffer his reason and his feelings to determine 
for themselves: that he will put on, or rather 
that he will not put off, the true character of 
a man, and generously enlarge his views beyond 
the present day. 

Volumes have been written on the subject of 
the struggle between England and America. 
Men of all ranks have embarked in the con- 
troversy, from different motives, and with 
various designs; but all have been ineffectual, 
and the period of debate is closed. Arms as 
the last resource decide the contest; the appeal 
was the choice of the King, and the Continent 
has accepted the challenge. 

It hath been reported of the late Mr. Pelham 
(who tho' an able minister was not without 
his faults) that on his being attacked in the 
House of Commons on the score that his meas- 
ures were only of a temporary kind, replied, 
''they will last my time. 9 ' Should a thought so 
fatal and unmanly possess the Colonies in the 
present contest, the name of ancestors will be 



COMMON SENSE 57 

remembered by future generations with de- 
testation. 

The Sun never shined on a cause of greater 
worth. Tis not the affair of a City, a County, 
a Province, or a Kingdom; but of a Continent 
of at least one-eighth part of the habitable 
Globe. 'Tis not the concern of a day, a year, 
or an age; posterity are virtually involved in 
the contest, and will be more or less affected 
even to the end of time, by the proceedings now. 
Now is the seed-time of Continental union, 
faith and honour. The least fracture now will 
be like a name engraved with the point of a 
pin on the tender rind of a young oak; the 
wound would enlarge with the tree, and pos- 
terity read in it full grown characters. 

By referring the matter from argument to 
arms, a new era for politics is struck a new 
method of thinking hath arisen. All plans, 
proposals, &c. prior to the nineteenth of April, 
i. e. to the commencement of hostilities,* are 
like the almanacks of the last year; which tho' 
proper then, are superceded and useless now. 
Whatever was advanced by the advocates on 
either side of the question then, terminated in 
one and the same point, viz. a union with 
Great Britain; the only difference between the 
parties was the method of effecting it; the one 
proposing force, the other friendship; but it 
hath so faj; happened that the first hath failed, 
and the second hath withdrawn her influence. 

As much hath been said of the advantages 
of reconciliation, which, like an agreeable 



*At Lexington, Massachusetts, 1775. Editor. 



S$ COMMON SENSE 

dream, hath passed away and left us as we 
were, it is but right that we should examine 
the contrary side of the argument, and enquire 
into some of the many material injuries which 
these Colonies sustain, and always will sustain, 
by being connected with and dependant on 
Great Britain. To examine that connection 
and dependance, on the principles of nature and 
common sense, to see what we have to trust to, 
if separated, and what we are to expect, if 
dependant. 

I have heard it asserted by some, that as 
America has flourished under her former con- 
nection with Great Britain, the same connection 
is necessary towards her future happiness, and 
will always have the same effect. Nothing can 
be more fallacious than this kind of argument. 
We may as well assert that because a child has 
thrived upon milk, that it is never to have 
meat, or that the first twenty years of our 
lives is to become a precedent for the next 
twenty. But even this is admitting more than 
is true; for I answer roundly that America 
would have flourished as much, and probably 
much more, had no European power taken any 
notice of her. The commerce by which she 
hath enriched herself are the necessaries of 
life, and will always have a market while eat- 
ing is the custom of Europe. 

But she has protected us, say some. That 
she hath engrossed us is true, and defended the 
Continent at our expense as well as her own, 
is admitted; and she would have defended 
Turkey from the same motive, viz. for the sake 
of trade and dominion. 



COMMON SENSE 39 

Alas! we have been long led away by ancient 
prejudices and made large sacrifices to super- 
stition. We have boasted the protection of 
Great Britain, without considering, that her 
motive was interest not attachment; and that 
she did not protect us from our enemies on our 
account; but from her enemies on her own ac- 
count, from those who had no quarrel with us 
on any other account, and who will always be 
our enemies on the same account. Let Britain 
waive her pretensions to the Continent, or the 
Continent throw off the dependance, and we 
should be at peace with France and Spain, 
were they at war with Britain. The miseries 
of Hanover last war ought to warn us against 
connections. 

It hath lately been asserted in parliament, 
that the Colonies have no relation to each other 
but through the Parent Country, i. e. that Penn- 
sylvania and the Jerseys and so on for the 
rest, are sister Colonies by the way of England; 
this is certainly a very roundabout way of 
proving relationship, but it is the nearest and 
only true way of proving enmity (or enemy- 
ship, if I may so call it.) France and Spain 
never were, nor perhaps ever will be, our 
enemies as Americans, but as our being the 
subjects of Great Britain. 

But Britain is the parent country, say some. 
Then the more shame upon her conduct. Even 
brutes do not devour their young, nor savages 
make war upon their families. Wherefore, the 
assertion, if true, turns to her reproach; but 
it happens not to be true, or only partly so, and 
the phrase parent or mother country hath been 



40 COMMQN SENSE 

jesuitically adopted by the King and his par- 
asites, with a low papistical design of gaining 
an unfair bias on the credulous weakness of 
our minds. Europe, and not England, is the 
parent country of America. This new World 
hath been the asylum for the persecuted lovers' 
of civil and religious liberty from every part of 
Europe. Hither have they fled, not from the 
tender embraces of the mother, but from the 
cruelty of the monster; and it is so far true of 
England, that the same tyranny which drove 
the first emigrants from home, pursues their 
descendants still. 

In this extensive quarter of the globe, we for- 
get the narrow limits of three hundred and 
sixty miles (the extent of England) and carry 
our friendship on a larger scale; we claim 
brotherhood with every European Christian, and 
triumph in the generosity of the sentiment. 

It is pleasant to observe by what regular 
gradations we surmount the force of local pre- 
judices, as we enlarge our acquaintance with 
the World. A man born in any town in Eng- 
land divided into parishes, will naturally as- 
sociate most with his fellow parishioners (be- 
cause their interests in many cases will be com- 
mon) and distinguish him by the name of 
neighbour; if he meet him but a few miles 
from home, he drops the narrow idea of a 
street, and salutes him by the name of toivns- 
mari; if he travel out of the county and meet 
him in any other, he forgets the minor divis- 
ions of street and town, and calls him country- 
man, i. e. countyman: but if in their foreign 
excursions they should associate in France, or 



COMMON SENSE 41 

any other part of Europe, their local remem- 
brance would be enlarged into that of English- 
men. And by a just parity of reasoning, all 
Europeans meetings in America, or any other 
quarter of the globe, are countrymen; for Eng- 
land, Holland, Germany, or Sweden, when com- 
pared with the whole, stand in the same places 
on the larger scale, which the divisions of 
street, town, and county do on the smaller 
>ones; Distinctions too limited for Continental 
minds. Not one third of the inhabitants, even 
of this province, [Pennsylvania], are of Eng- 
lish descent. Wherefore, I reprobate the phrase 
of Parent or Mother Country applied to Eng- 
land only, as being false, selfish, narrow and 
ungenerous. 

But, admitting that we were all of English 
descent, what does it amount to? Nothing. 
Britain, being now an open enemy, extinguishes 
every other name and title: and to say that re" 
conciliation is our duty, is truly farcical. The 
first king of England, of the present line (Wil- 
liam the Conqueror) was a Frenchman, and 
half the peers of England are descendants from 
the same country; wherefore, by the same 
method of reasoning, England ought to be gov- 
erned by France. 

Much hath been said of the united strength 
of Britain and the Colonies, that in conjunc- 
tion they might bid defiance to the world: But 
this is mere presumption; the fate of war is 
uncertain, neither do the expressions mean any- 
thing; for this continent would never suffer 
itself to be drained of inhabitants, to support 



42 COMMON SENSE 

the British arms in cither Asia, Africa, or 
Europe. 

Besides, what have we to do with setting the 
world at defiance? Our plan is commerce, and 
that, well attended to, will secure us the peace 
and friendship of all Europe; because it is the 
interest of all' Europe to have America a free 
port. Her trade will always be a protection, 
and her barrenness of gold and silver secure 
her from invaders. 

I challenge the warmest advocate for recon- 
ciliation to show a single advantage that this 
continent can reap by being connected with 
Great Britain. I repeat the challenge; not a 
single advantage is derived. Our corn will 
fetch its price in any market in Europe, and 
our imported goods must be paid for buy them 
where we will. 

But the injuries and disadvantages which we 
sustain by that connection, are without num- 
ber; and our duty to mankind at large, as well 
as to ourselves, instruct us to renounce the alli- 
ance: because, any submission to, or depend- 
ance on, Great Britain, tends directly to in- 
volve this Continent in European wars and 
quarrels, and set us at variance with nations 
who would otherwise seek our frieclship, and 
against whom we have neither anger nor com- 
plaint. As Europe is our market for trade, 
we ought to form no partial connection with 
any part of it. It is the true interest of Amer- 
ica to steer clear of European contentions, 
which she never can do, while, by her depend- 
ance on Britain, she is made the make-weight 
in the scale of British politics. 



COMMON SENSE 43 

Europe is too thickly planted with Kingdoms 
to be long at peace, and whenever a war breaks 
out between England and any foreign power, 
the trade of America goes to ruin, because of 
Tier connection with Britain. The next war 
may not turn out like the last, and should it 
not, the advocates for reconciliation now will 
be wishing for separation then, because neu- 
trality in that case would be a safer convoy 
than a man of war. Every thing that is right 
or reasonable pleads for separation. The blood 
of the slain, the weeping voice of nature cries, 
'Tis TIME TO PAKT. Even the distance at which 
the Almighty hath placed England and America 
is a strong and natural proof that the autho- 
rity of the one over the other, was never the 
design of Heaven. The time likewise at which 
the Continent was discovered, adds weight to 
the argument, and the manner in which it was 
peopled, encreases the force of it. The Refor- 
mation was preceded by the discovery of Am- 
erica: As if the Almighty graciously meant 
to open a sanctuary to the persecuted in fu- 
ture years, when home should afford neither 
friendship nor safety. 

The authority of Great Britain over this con- 
tinent, is a form of government, which sooner 
or later must have an end: And a serious 
mind can draw no true pleasure by looking 
forward, under the painful and positive con- 
viction that what he calls "the present con- 
stitution" is merely temporary. As parents, 
we can have no joy, knowing that this govern- 
ment is not sufficiently lasting to ensure any 
thing which we may bequeath to posterity: 



44 COMMON SENSE 

And by a plain method of argument, as we are 
running the next generation into debt, we 
ought to do the work of it, otherwise we use 
them meanly and pitifully. In order to dis- 
cover the line of our duty rightly, we should 
take our children in our hand, and fix our 
station a few years farther into life; that emin- 
ence will present a prospect which a few pres- 
ent fears and prejudices conceal from our sight. 

Though I would carefully avoid giving un- 
necessary offence, yet T am inclined to believe, 
that all those who espouse the doctrine of re- 
conciliation, may be included within the fol- 
lowing descriptions. 

Interested men, who are not to be trusted, 
weak men who cannot see, prejudiced men who 
will not see, and a certain set of moderate men 
who think better of the European world than 
it deserves; and this last class, by an ill-judged 
deliberation, will be the cause of more calam- 
ities to this Continent than all the other three. 

It is the good fortune of many to live distant 
from the scene of present sorrow; the evil is 
not sufficiently brought to their doors to make 
them feel the precariousness with which all 
American property is possessed. But let our 
imaginations transport us a few moments to 
Boston; that seat of wretchedness will teach 
us wisdom, and instruct us for ever to re- 
nounce a power in whom we can have no trust. 
The inhabitants of that unfortunate city who 
but a few months ago were in ease and afflu- 
ence, have now no other alternative than to 
stay and starve, or turn out to beg. Endan- 
gered by the fire of their friends if they con- 



COMMON SENSE 45 

tinue within the city and plundered by the 
soldiery if they leave it, in their present sit- 
uation they are prisoners without the hope of 
redemption, and in a general attack for their 
relief they would be exposed to the fury of 
both armies. 

"Men of passive tempers look somewhat light- 
ly over the offences of Great Britain, and, still 
hoping for the best, are apt to call out, Come, 
come, we shall be friends again for all this. 
But examine the passions and feelings of man- 
kind: bring the doctrine of reconciliation to 
the touchstone of nature, and then tell me 
whether you can hereafter love, honour, and 
faithfully serve the power that hath carried 
fire and sword into your land? If you cannot 
do all these, then are you only deceiving your- 
selves, and by your delay bringing ruin upon 
posterity. Your future connection with Bri- 
tain, whom you can neither love nor honour, 
will be forced and unnatural, and being formed 
only on the plan of present convenience, will 
in a little time fall into a relapse more wretch- 
ed than the first. But if you say, you can still 
pass the violations over, then I ask, hath your 
house been burnt? Hath your property been 
destroyed before your face? Are your wife and 
children destitute of a bed to lie on, or bread 
to live on? Have you lost a parent or a child 
by their hands, and yourself the ruined and 
wretched survivor? If you have not, then are 
you not a judge of those who have. But if you 
have, and can still shake hands with the mur- 
derers, then are you unworthy the name of 
husband, father, friend or lover, and whatever 



46 COMMON SENSE 

may be your rank or title in life, you have the 
heart of a coward, and the spirit of a sycophant. 

This is not inflaming or exaggerating mat- 
ters, but trying them by those feelings and 
affections which nature justifies, and without 
which we should be incapable of discharging 
the social duties of life, or enjoying the feli- 
cities of it. I mean not to exhibit horror for 
the purpose of provoking revenge, but to awak- 
en us from fatal and unmanly slumbers, that 
we may pursue determinately some fixed ob- 
ject. 'Tis not in the power of Britain or of 
Europe to conquer America, if she doth not 
conquer herself by delay and timidity. The 
present winter is worth an age if rightly em- 
ployed, but if lost or neglected the whole Con- 
tinent will partake of the misfortune; and 
there is no punishment which that man doth 
not deserve, be he who, or what, or where he 
will, that may be the means of sacrificing a 
season so precious and useful. 

'Tis repugnant to reason, to the universal 
order of things, to all examples from former 
ages, to suppose that this Continent can long 
remain subject to any external power. The 
most sanguine in Britain doth not think so. 
The utmost stretch of human wisdom cannot, 
at this time, compass a plan, short of separa- 
tion, which can promise the continent even a 
year's security. Reconciliation is noiv> a fal- 
lacious dream. Nature hath deserted the con- 
nection, and art cannot supply her place. For, 
as Milton wisely expresses, "never can true 
reconcilement grow where wounds of deadly 
hate have pierced so deep." 



COMMON SENSE 47 

Every quiet method for peace hath been in- 
effectual. Our prayers have been rejected with 
disdain; and hath tended to convince us that 
nothing flatters vanity or confirms obstinacy 
in Kings more than repeated petitioning and 
nothing hath contributed more than that very 
measure to make the Kings of Europe absolute. 
Witness Denmark and Sweden. Wherefore, 
since nothing but blows will do, for God's sake 
let us come to a final separation, and not 
leave the next generation to be cutting throats 
under the violated unmeaning names of parent 
and child. 

To say they will never attempt it again is 
idle and visionary; we thought so at the re- 
peal of the stamp act, yet a year or two un- 
deceived us; as well may we suppose that na- 
tions which have been once defeated will never 
renew the quarrel. 

As to government matters, 'tis not in the 
power of Britain to do this continent justice: 
the business of it will soon be too weighty and 
intricate to be managed with any tolerable de- 
gree of convenience, by a power so distant 
from us, and so very ignorant of us; for if they 
cannot conquer us, they cannot govern us. To 
be always running three or four thousand miles 
with a tale or petition, waiting for four or five 
months for an answer, which, when obtained, 
requires five or six more to explain it in, will 
in a few years be looked upon as folly and 
childishness. There was a time when it was 
proper, and there is a proper time for it to 
cease. 

Small islands not capable of protecting them- 



48 COMMON SENSE 

selves are the proper objects for government 1 
to take under their care; but there is some- 
thing absurd, in supposing a Continent to be 
perpetually governed by an island. In no in- 
stance hath nature made the satellite larger 
than its primary planet; and as England and 
America, with respect to each other, reverse 
the common order of nature, it is evident that 
they belong to differnt systems. England to 
Europe: America to itself. 

I am not induced by motives of pride, party, 
or resentment to espouse the doctrine of sep- 
aration and independence; I am clearly, posi- 
tively, and conscientiously persuaded that it 
is the true interest of this Continent to be so; 
that every thing short of that is mere patch- 
work, that it can afford no lasting felicity, 
that it is leaving the sword to our children, 
and shrinking back at a time when a little 
more, a little further, would have rendered this 
Continent the glory of the earth. 

As Britain hath not manifested the least in- 
clination towards a compromise, we may be as- 
sured that no terms can be obtained worthy 
the acceptance of the Continent, or any ways 
equal to the expense of blood and treasure we 
have been already put to. 

The object contended for, ought always to 
bear some just proportion to the expense. The 
removal of North, or the whole detestable 
junto, is a matter unworthy the millions we 
have expended. A temporary stoppage of trade 
was an inconvenience, which would have suf- 



*In some later editions "kingdoms." Editor, 



(JLLMA1GN SKNSE 49 

ficiently balanced the repeal of all the acts 
complained of, had such repeals been obtained; 
but if the whole Continent must take up arms, 
if every man must be a soldier, 'tis scarcely 
worth our while to fight against a contempti- 
ble ministry only. Dearly, dearly do we pay 
for the repeal of the acts, if that is all we fight 
for; for, in a just estimation 'tis as great a 
folly to pay a Bunker-hill price for law as for 
land. As I have always considered the inde- 
pendancy of this Continent, as an event which 
sooner or later must arrive, so from the late 
rapid progress of the Continent to maturity, 
the event cannot be far off. Wherefore, on the 
breaking out of hostilities, it was not worth 
the while to have disputed a matter which time 
would have finally redressed, unless we meant 
to be in earnest: otherwise it is like wasting 
an estate on a suit at law, to regulate the 
tresspasses of a tenant whose lease is just ex- 
piring. No man was a warmer wisher for a 
reconciliation than myself, before the fatal 
nineteenth of April, 1775, but the moment the 
event of that day was made known, I rejected 
the hardened, sullen-tempered Pharoah of Eng- 
land for ever; and disdain the wretch, that 
with the pretended title of FATHER OF HIS PEO- 
PLE can unfeelingly hear of their slaughter, and 
composedly sleep with their blood upon his 
soul. 

But admitting that matters were now made 
up, what would be the event? I answer, the 
ruin of the Continent. And that for several 
reasons. 

First. The powers c f governing still rema/r- 



50 COMMON SENSE 

ing in the hands of the King, he will have a 
negative over the whole legislation of this Con- 
tinent. And as he hath shown himself such 
an inveterate enemy to liberty, and discovered 
such a thirst for arbitrary powers, is he, or is 
he not, a proper person to say to these colonies, 
You shall make, no laws 1 but what I please!? 
And is there any inhabitant of America so igno- 
rant as not to know, that according to what is 
called the present constitution, this Continent 
can make no laws but what the king gives 
leave to; and is there any man so unwise as 
not to see, that (considering what has hap- 
pened) he will suffer no law to be made here 
but such as suits his purpose? We may be as 
effectually enslaved by the want of laws in 
America, as by submitting to laws made for us 
in England. After matters are made up (as it 
is called) can there be any doubt, but the whole 
power of the crown will be exerted to keep this 
continent as low and humble as possible? In- 
stead of going forward we shall go backward, 
or be perpetually quarrelling, or ridiculously 
petitioning. We are already greater than tne 
King wishes us to be, and will he not hereafter 
endeavor to make us less? To bring the mat- 
ter to one point, Is the power who is jealous 
of our prosperity, a proper power to govern 
us? Whoever says No, to this question, is an 
Independant for independency means no more 
than this, whether we shall make our own 
laws, or, whether the King, the greatest enemy 
this continent hath, or can have, shall tell us 
there shall be no laws but such as I like. 
But the King, you will say, has a negative 



COMMON SENSE 51 

in England; the people there can make no 
laws without his consent. In point of right 
and good order, it is something very ridicul- 
ous that a youth of twenty-one (which hath 
often happened) shall say to several millions 
of people older and wiser than himself, "I for- 
bid this or that act of yours to be law." But 
in this place I decline this sort of reply, 
though I will never cease to expose the ab- 
surdity of it, and only answer that England 
being the King's residence, and America not so, 
makes quite another case. The King's nega- 
tive here is ten times more dangerous and 
fatal than it can be in England; for there he 
will scarcely refuse his consent to a bill for 
putting England into as strong a state of de- 
fense as possible, and in America he would 
never suffer such a bill to be passed. 

America is only a secondary object in the 
system of British politics. England consults 
the good of this country no further than it 
answers her own purpose. Wherefore, her own 
interest leads her to suppress the growth of 
ours in every case which doth not promote her 
advantage, or in the least interferes with it. 
A pretty state we should soon be in under such 
a second hand government, considering what 
has happened. Men do not change from ene- 
mies to friends by the alteration of a name: 
And in order to show that reconciliation now 
is a, dangerous doctrine, I affirm, that it would 
be policy in the King at this time to repeal the 
acts, for the sake of reinstating himself in the 
government of the provinces: In order that 

HE MAY ACCOMPLISH BY CRAFT AND SUBTLETY, IN 



52 COMMON SENSE 

THE LONG RUN, WHAT HE CANNOT DO BY FORCE) 
AND VIOLENCE IN THE SHORT ONE. ReCOncilia- 

tion and ruin are nearly related. 

Secondly. That as even the best terms 
which we can expect to obtain can amount to 
no more than a temporary expedient, or a kind 
of government by guardianship, which can last 
no longer than till the Colonies come of age, 
so the general face and state of things in the 
interim will be unsettled and unpromising. 
Emigrants of property will not choose to come 
to a country whose form of government hangs 
but by a thread, and who is every day tottering 
on the brink of commotion and disturbance; 
and numbers of the present inhabitants would 
lay hold of the interval to dispose of their ef- 
fects, and quit the Continent. 

But the most powerful of all arguments is, 
that nothing but independance, i. e. a Contin- 
ental form of government, can keep the peace 
of the Continent and preserve it inviolate from 
civil wars. I dread the event of a reconcilia- 
tion with Britain now, as it is more than prob- 
able that it will be followed by a revolt some 
where or other, the consequences of which 
may be far more fatal than all the malice of 
Britain. 

Thousands are already ruined by British bar- 
barity; (thousands more will probably suffer 
the same fate.) Those men have other feel- 
ings than us who have nothing suffered. All 
they now possess is liberty; what they before 
enjoyed is sacrificed to its service, and having 
nothing more to lose they disdain submission. 
Besides, the general temper of the Colonies, 



COMMON SENSE 53 

towards a British government will be like that 
of a youth who is nearly out of his time; they 
will care very little about her: And a govern- 
ment which cannot preserve the peace is no 
government at all, and in that case we pay our 
money for nothing; and pray what is it that 
Britain can do, whose power will be wholly 
on paper, should a civil tumult break out the 
very day after reconciliation? I have heard 
men say, many of whom I believe spoke with- 
out thinking, that they dreaded an indepen- 
dance, fearing that it would produce civil 
wars: It is but seldom that our first thoughts 
are truly correct, and that is the case here; 
for there is ten times more to dread from a 
patched up connection than from independ- 
ance. I make the sufferer's case my own, and 
I protest, that were I driven from house and 
home, my property destroyed, and my circum- 
stances ruined, that as a man, sensible of in- 
juries, I could never relish the doctrine of 
reconciliation, or consider myself bound there- 
by. 

The Colonies have manifested such a spirit 
of good order and obedience to Continental 
government, as is sufficient to make every rea- 
sonable person easy and happy on that head. 
No man can assign the least pretence for his 
fears, on any other grounds, than such as are 
truly childish and ridiculous, viz., that one 
colony will be striving for superiority over an- 
other. 

Where there are no distinctions there can be 
no superiority; perfect equality affords no 
temptation. The Republics of Europe are all 



64 COMMON SENSE 

(and we may say always) in peace. Holland 
and Switzerland are without wars, foreign or 
domestic: Monarchial governments, it is true 
are never long at rest: the crown itself is a 
temptation to enterprising ruffians at home; 
and that degree of pride and insolence ever at 
tendant on regal authority, swells into a rup 
ture with foreign powers in instances where & 
republican government, by being formed on 
more natural principles, would negotiate thvi 
mistake. 

If there is any true cause of fear respecting 
independance, it is because no plan is yet laid 
down. Men do not see their way out. Where- 
fore, as an opening into that business I offer 
the following hints; at the same time modestly 
affirming, that I have no other opinion of them 
myself, than that they may be the means of 
giving rise to something better. Could the 
straggling thoughts of individuals be collected, 
they would frequently form materials for wise 
and able men to improve into useful matter. 

Let the assemblies be annual, with a presi- 
dent only. The representation more equal, 
their business wholly domestic, and subject -to 
the authority of a Continental Congress. 

Let each Colony be divided into six, eight, 
or ten, convenient districts, each district to 
cend a proper number of Delegates to Congress, 
so that each Colony send at least thirty. The 
whole number in Congress will be at least 390. 
Each congress to sit and to choose a President 
by the following method. When the Delegates 
are met, let a Colony be taken from the whole 
thirteen Colonies by lot, after which let the 



COMMON SENSE 6B 

Congress choose (by ballot) a president from 
out of the Delegates of that Province. In the 
next Congress, let a Colony be taken by lot 
from twelve only, omitting that Colony from 
which the president was taken in the former 
Congress, and so proceeding on till the whole 
thirteen shall have had their proper rotation. 
And in order that nothing may pass into a law 
but what is satisfactorily just, not less than 
three fifths of the Congress to be called a 
majority. He that will promote discord, un- 
der a government so equally formed as this, 
would have joined Lucifer in his revolt. 

But as there is a peculiar delicacy from 
whom, or in what manner, this business must 
first arise, and as it seems most agreeable and 
consistent that it sould come from some inter- 
mediate body between the governed and the 
governors, that is, between the Congress and 
the People, let a Continental Conference be 
held in the following manner, and for the fol- 
lowing purpose, 

A Committee of twenty-six members of con- 
gress, viz. Two for each Colony. Two Members 
from each House of Assembly, or Provincial 
Convention: and five Representatives of the 
people at large, to be chosen in the capital city 
or town of each Province, for, and in behalf of 
the whole Province, by as many qualified vot- 
ers as shall think proper to attend from all 
parts of the Province for that purpose; or, if 
more convenient, the Representatives may be 
chosen in two or three of the most populous 
parts thereof. In this conference, thus as- 
sembled, will be united the two grand prin- 



66 COMMON SENSE 

ciples of business, knowledge and power. The 
Members of Congress, Assemblies, or Conven- 
tions, by having had experience in national 
concerns, will be able and useful counsellors, 
and the whole, being impowered by the people, 
will have a truly legal authority. 

The conferring members being met, let their 
business be to frame a Continental Charter, or 
Charter of the United Colonies; (answering 
what is called the Magna Charta of England) 
fixing the nttmber and manner of choosing 
Members of Congress, Members of Assembly, 
with their date of sitting; and drawing the line 
of business and jurisdiction between them: Al- 
ways remembering, that our strength is Conti- 
nental, not provincial. Securing freedom and 
property to all men, and above all things, the 
free exercise of religion, according to the dic- 
tates of conscience; with such other matter as 
it is necessary for a charter to contain. Imme- 
diately after which, the said conference to dis- 
solve, and the bodies which shall be chosen 
conformable to the said charter, to be the Leg- 
islators and Governors of this Continent for 
the time being: Whose peace and happiness, 
may GOD preserve. AMEN. 

Should any body of men be hereafter dele- 
gated for this or some similar purpose, I offer 
them the following extracts from that wise ob- 
server on Governments, Dragonetti. "The 
science," says he, "of the Politician consists in 
fixing the true point of happiness and freedom. 
Those men would deserve the gratitude of ages, 
who should discover a mode of government 
that contained the greatest sum of individual 



COMMON SENSE 57 

happiness, with the least national expense." 
(Dragonetti on "Virtues and Reward.") 

But where, say some, is the King of Ameri- 
ca? I'll tell you, friend, he reigns above, and 
doth not make havoc of mankind like the Royal 
Brute of Great Britain. Yet that we may not 
appear to be defective even in earthly honours, 
let a day be solemnly set apart for proclaiming 
the Charter; let it be brought forth placed on 
the Divine Law, the Word of God; let a crown 
be placed thereon, by which the world may 
know, that so far as we approve of monarchy, 
that in America the law is king. For as in 
absolute governments the King is law, so in 
free countries the law ought to be king; and 
there ought to be no other. But lest any ill 
use should afterwards arise, let the Crown at 
the conclusion of the ceremony be demolished, 
and scattered among the people whose right it 
is. 

A government of our own is our natural 
right: and when a man seriously reflects on 
the precariousness of human affairs, he will 
become convinced, that it is infinitely wiser 
and safer, to form a constitution of our own 
in a cool deliberate manner, while we have it 
in our power, than to trust such an interesting 
event to time and chance. If we omit it now, 
some Massanello* may hereafter arise, who, 

"Thomas Anello, otherwise Massanello, a fish- 
erman of Naples, who after spiriting up his 
countrymen in- the public market place, against 
the oppression of the Spaniards, to whom the 
place was then subject, prompted them to revolt, 
and in the space of a day became Kine:. Author. 



58 COMMON SENSE 

laying hold of popular disquietudes, may col- 
lect together the desperate and the discon- 
tented, and by assuming to themselves the 
powers of government, finally sweep away the 
liberties of the Continent like a deluge. Should 
the government of America return again into 
the hands of Britain, the tottering situation of 
things will be a temptation for some desperate 
adventurer to try his fortune; and in such a 
case, what relief can Britain give? Ere she 
could hear the news, the fatal business might 
be done; and ourselves suffering like the 
wretched Britons under the oppression of the 
Conqueror. Ye that oppose independance now, 
ye know not what ye do: ye are opening a door 
to eternal tyranny, by keeping vacant the seat 
of government. There are thousands and tens 
of thousands, who would think it glorious to 
expel from the Continent, that barbarous and 
hellish power, which hath stirred up the In- 
dians and the Negroes to destroy us; the 
cruelty hath a double guilt, it is dealing brut- 
ally by us, and treacherously by them. 

To talk of friendship with those in whom 
our reason forbids us to have faith, and our 
affections wounded thro' a thousand pores in- 
struct us to detest, is madness and folly. 
Every day wears out the little remains of 
kindred between us and them; and can there 
be any reason to hope, that as the relationship 
expires, the affection will encrease, or that we 
shall agree better when we have ten times more 
and greater concerns to quarrel over than ever? 

Ye that tell ns of harmony and reconciliation, 
can ye restore to us the time that is past? 



COMMON SENSE 59 

Can ye give to prostitution its former inno- 
cence? neither can ye reconcile Britain and 
America. The last cord now is broken, the 
people of England are presenting addresses 
against us. There are injuries which .nature 
cannot forgive; she would cease to be nature if 
she did. As well can the lover forgive the 
ravisher of his mistress, as the Continent for- 
give the murders of Britain. The Almighty 
hath implanted in us these unextinguishable 
feelings for good and wise purposes. They are 
the Guardians of his Image in our hearts. They 
distinguish us from the herd of common oni- 
mals. The social compact would dissolve, and 
justice be extirpated from the earth, or have 
only a casual existence were we callous to the 
touches of affection. The robber and the mur- 
derer would often escape unpunished, did not 
the injuries which our tempers sustain, pro- 
voke us into justice. 

0! ye that love mankind! Ye that dare op- 
pose not only the tyranny but the tyrant, stand 
forth! Every spot of the old world is overrun 
with oppression. Freedom hath been hunted 
round the Globe. Asia and Africa have long 
expelled her. Europe regards her like a stran- 
ger, and England hath given her warning to 
depart. 0! receive the fugitive, and prepare 
in time an asylum for mankind. 



(to COMMON SENSE 



OF THE PRESENT ABILITY OF AMERICA! WITH 
SOME MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS. 

I HAVE never met with a man, either in En- 
gland or America, who hath not confessed his 
opinion, that a separation between the countries 
would take place one time or other: And 
there is no instance in which we have shown 
less judgment, than in endeavoring to describe, 
what we call, the ripeness or fitness of the 
continent for independence. 

As all men allow the measure, and vary only 
in their opinion of the time, let us, in order to 
remove mistakes, take a general survey of 
things, and endeavor if possible to find out the 
very time. But I need not go far, the inquiry 
ceases at once, for the time hath found us. The 
general concurrence, the glorious union of all 
things, proves the fact. 

} Tis not in numbers but in unity that our 
great strength lies: yet our present numbers 
are sufficient to repel the force of all the world. 
The Continent hath at this time the largest 
body of armed and disciplined men of any 
power under Heaven: and is just arrived at 
that pitch of strength, in which no single col- 
ony is able to support itself, and the whole, 
when united, is able to do any thing. Our land 
force is more than sufficient, and as to Naval 
affairs, we cannot be insensible that Britain 



COMMON SENSE 61 

would never suffer an American man of war 
to be built, while the Continent remained in her 
hands. Wherefore, we should be no forwarder 
an hundred years hence in that branch than 
we are now; but the truth is, we should be 
less so, because the timber of the Country is 
every day~ diminishing, and that which will re- 
main at last, will be far off or difficult to pro- 
cure. 

Were the Continent crowded with inhabitants, 
her sufferings under the present circumstances 
would be intolerable. The more seaport-towns 
we had, the more should we have both to de- 
fend and to lose. Our present numbers are so 
happily proportioned to our wants, that no man 
need be idle. The diminution of trade affords 
an army, and the necessities of an army create 
a new trade. 

Debts we have none: and whatever we may 
contract on this account will serve as a glori- 
ous memento of our virtue. Can we but leave 
posterity with a settled form of government, an 
independent constitution of its own, the pur- 
chase at any price will be cheap. But to ex- 
pend millions for the sake of getting a few vile 
acts repealed, and routing the present minis- 
try only, is unworthy the charge, and is using 
posterity with the utmost cruelty; because it 
is leaving them the great work to do, and a 
debt upon their backs from which they derive 
no advantage. Such a thought 's unworthy a 
man of honour, and is the true characteristic 
of a narrow heart and a piddling politician. 

The debt we may contract doth not deserve 
our regard if the work be but accomplished 



62 COMMON SENSE 

No nation ought to be without a debt. A na- 
tional debt is a national bond; and when it 
bears no interest, is in no case a grievance. Brit- 
ain is oppressed with a debt of upwards of one 
hundred and forty millions sterling, for which 
she pays upwards of four millions interest. And 
as a compensation for her debt, she has a large 
navy; America is without a debt, and without a 
navy; yet for the twentieth part of the English 
national debt, could have a navy as large again. 
The navy of England is not worth at this time 
more than three millions and a half sterling. 

The first and second editions of this pamph- 
let were published without the following cal- 
culations, which are now given as a proof that 
the above estimation of the navy is a just one. 
See Entic's "Naval History," Intro., p. 56. 

The charge of building a ship of each rate, 
and furnishing her with masts, yards, sails, and 
rigging, together with a proportion of eight 
months boatswain's and carpenter's sea-stores, 
as calculated by Mr. Burchett, Secretary to the 
navy. 

For a ship of 100 guns, . . 35.553 1. 
90 29,886 



80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 



23.638 

17,785 

14,197 

10.606 

7,558 

5.846 

3,710 



And hence it is easy to sum up the value, or 
cost, rather, of the whole British navy, which, 
in the year 1757, when it was at its greatest 



COMMON SENS 12 63 

glory, consisted of the following ships and guns. 



Ships 


Guns 


Cost of One 


Cost of All 


6 


100 


55,553 1. . 


213,318 1. 


12 


90 


29886 


358,632 


12 


SO 


23,638 


283 656 


43 


70 


17,785 


764,755 


35 


60 


14,197 


496,895 


40 


50 


10,605 


424,240 


45 


40 


7,558 


340,110 


58 


20 


3,710 


215,180 



85 sloops, bombs, and 
fireships, one with 
another at 2,000 . 170,000 

Cost . 3,266,7861. 
Remains for guns, . 233,214 

Total, . 3,500,000 1. 

No country on the globe is so happily situated, 
or so internally capable of raising a fleet as 
America. Tar, timber, iron, and cordage are 
her natural produce. We need go abroad for 
nothing. Whereas the Dutch, who make large 
profits by hiring out their ships of war to the 
Spaniards and Portuguese, are obliged to import 
most of the materials they use. We ought to 
view the building a fleet as an article of com- 
merce, it being the natural manufactory of this 
country. 'Tis the best money we can lay out. 
A navy when finished is worth more than it 
cost: And is that nice point in national policy, 
in which commerce and protection are united. 
Let us build; if we want them not, we can sell; 
and by that means replace our paper currency 
with ready geld and silver. 

In point of manning a fleet, people in gen- 
eral run into great errors; it is not necessary 
that one-fourth part should be sailors. Thqj 



64 COMMON SENSE 

Terrible privateer, captain Death, stood the hot- 
test engagement of any ship last war, yet had 
not twenty sailors on board, though her com- 
plement of men was upwards of two hundred. 
A few able and social sailors will soon instruct 
a sufficient number of active landsmen in the 
common work of a ship. Wherefore we never 
can be more capable of beginning on maritime 
matters than now, while our timber is stand- 
ing, our fisheries blocked up, and our sailors 
and shipwrights out of employ. Men of war, of 
seventy and eighty guns, were built forty years 
n aso in New England, and why not the same 
now? Ship building is America's greatest pride, 
and in which sheffl|ll, in time, excel the whole 
j -world. The great aingbires of the east are mainly 
] inland, and consequently excluded from the pos- 
isibility of rivallingjfidtier. Africa is in a state of 
lf)arbarism ; and no h^pwer in Europe hath either 
'such an extent of cjaast, or such an internal sup- 
ply of materials. Jwfhere nature hath given the 
one, she hath withheld the other; to America 
only hath she been liberal to both. The vast 
empire of Russia is almost shut out from the 
sea; wherefore her boundless forests, her tar, 
iron and cordage are only articles of commerce. 
In point of safety, ought we to be without a 
fleet? We are not the little people now which 
we were sixty years ago ; at that time we might 
have trusted our property in the streets, or 
fields rather, and slept securely without locks 
or bolts to our doors and windows. The case 
is now altered, and our methods of defence 
ought to improve with our increase of property. 
A common pirate, twelve months ago, might 



SENSE kb 

have coine up the Delaware, and laid the city of 
Philadelphia under contribution for what sum 
he pleased; and the same might have happened 
to other places. Nay, any daring fellow, in a 
brig of fourteen or sixteen guns, might have 
robbed the whole Continent, and carried off half 
a million of money. These are circumstances 
which demand our attention, and point out the 
necessity of naval protection. 

Some perhaps will say, that after we have 
made it up with Britain, she will protect us. 
Can they be so unwise as to mean that she will 
keep a navy in our harbors for that purpose? 
Common sense will tell us that the power 
which hath endeavoured to subdue ^us, is of all 
others the most improper to defend us. Con- 
quest may be effected under the pretence of 
friendship; and ourselves, after a long and 
brave resistance, be at last cheated into slavery. 
And if her ships are not to be admitted into 
our harbours, I would ask, how is she going to 
protect us? A navy three or four thousand 
miles off can be of little use, and on sudden 
emergencies, none at all. Wherefore if we must 
hereafter protect ourselves, why not do it for 
ourselves? Why do it for another? 

The English list of ^hips of war is long and 
formidable, but not a tenth part of them are at 
any time fit for service, numbers of them are 
not in being; yet their names are pompously 
continued in the list, if only a plank be left of 
the ship; and not a fifth part of such as are 
fit for service can be spared on any one station 
at one time. The East and West Indies, Med- 
iterranean, Africa, and other parts, over which 



66 COMMON SENS15 

Britain extends her claim, make large demands 
upon her navy. From a mixture of prejudice 
and inattention we have contracted a false no- 
tion respecting the navy of England, and have 
talked as if we should have the whole of it to 
encounter at once, and for that reason sup- 
posed that we must have one as large; which 
not being instantly practicable, has been made 
use of by a set of disguised Tories to discourage 
our beginning thereon. Nothing can be further 
from truth than this; for if America had only 
a twentieth part of the naval force of Britain, 
she would be by far an over-match for her; be- 
cause, as we neither have, nor claim any for- 
eign dominion, our whole force would be em- 
ployed on our. own coast, where we should, in 
the long run, have two to one the advantage of 
those who had three or four thousand miles to 
sail over before they could attack us, and the 
same distance to return in order to refit and 
recruit. And although Britain, by her fleet, 
hath a check over our trade to Europe, we 
have as large a one over her trade to the West 
Indies, which, by laying in the neighborhood of 
the Continent, lies entirely at its mercy. 

Some method might be fallen on to keep up 
a naval force in time of peace, if we should 
judge it necessary to stfpport a constant navy. 
If premiums were to be given to merchants to 
build and employ in their service ships mounted 
with twenty, thirty, forty, or fifty guns (the 
premiums to be in proportion to the loss of 
bulk to the merchant), fifty or sixty of those 
ships, with a few guardships on constant duty, 
would keep up a sufficient navy, and that with- 



COMMON SENSE 67 

out burdening ourselves with the evil so loudly 
complained of in England, of suffering their 
fleet in time of peace to lie rotting in the docks. 
To unite the sinews of commerce and defence is 
sound policy; for when our strength and our 
riches play into each other's hand, we need fear 
no external enemy. 

In almost every article of defence we 
abound. Hemp flourishes even to rankness, so 
that we need not want cordage. Our iron is 
superior to that of other countries. Our small 
arms equal to any in the world. Cannon we can 
cast at pleasure. Saltpetre and gunpowder we 
are every day producing. Our knowledge is 
hourly improving. Resolution is our inherent 
character, and courage hath never yet forsaken 
us. Wherefore, what is it that we want? Why 
is it that we hesitate? From Britain we can 
expect nothing but ruin. If she is once admit- 
ted to the government of America again, this 
Continent will not be worth living in. Jeal- 
ousies will be always arising; insurrections will 
be constantly happening; and who will go forth 
to quell them? Who will venture his life to 
reduce his own countrymen to a foreign obedi- 
ence? The difference between Pennsylvania and 
Connecticut, respecting some unlocated lands, 
shows the insignificance of a British govern- 
ment, and fully proves that nothing but Conti- 
nental authority can regulate Continental mat- 
ters. 

Another reason why the present time is pre- 
ferable to all others is, that the fewer our 
numbers are, the more land there is yet unoc- 
cupied, which, instead of being lavished by the 



68 COMMON SENSE 

king on his worthless dependents, may be here- 
after applied, not only to the discharge of the 
present debt, but to the constant support of gov- 
ernment. No nation under Heaven hath such 
an advantage as this. 

The infant state of the Colonies, as it is 
called, so far from being against, is an argument 
in favour of independence. We are sufficiently 
numerous, and were we more so we might be 
less united. ''Tis a matter worthy of observa- 
tion that the more a country is peopled, the 
smaller their armies are. In military numbers, 
the ancients far exceeded the moderns; and the 
reason is evident, for trade being the conse- 
quence of population, men became too much 
absorbed thereby to attend to anything else. 
Commerce diminishes the spirit both of patri- 
otism and military defence. And history suffi- 
ciently informs us that the bravest achieve- 
ments were always accomplished in the non-age- 
of a nation. With the increase of commerce 
England hath lost its spirit. The city of Lon- 
don, notwithstanding its numbers, submits to 
continued insults with the patience of a coward. 
The more men have to lose, the less willing are 
they to venture. The rich are in general slaves 
to fear, and submit to courtly power with the 
trembling duplicity of a spaniel. 

Youth is the seed-time of good habits as well 
in nations as in individuals. It might be diffi- 
cult, if not impossible, to form the Continent 
into one government half a century hence. The 
vast variety of interests, occasioned by an in- 
crease of trade and population, would create 
confusion. Colony would be against colony. 



COMMON SENSE 69 

Each being able would scorn each other's as 
sistance; and while the proud and foolish 
gloried in their little distinctions the wise would 
lament that the union had not been formed be- 
fore. Wherefore the present time is the true 
time for establishing it. The intimacy which is 
contracted in infancy, and the friendship which 
is formed in misfortune, are of all others the 
most lasting and unalterable. Our present union 
is marked with both these characters; we are 
young, and we have been distressed; but our 
concord hath withstood our troubles, and fixes 
a memorable era for posterity to glory in. 

The present time, likewise, is that peculiar 
time which never happens to a nation but once, 
viz., the time of forming itself into a govern- 
ment. Most nations have let slip the oppor- 
tunity, and by that means Jiave been compelled 
to receive laws from their conquerors, instead 
of making laws for themselves. First, they 
had a king, and then a form of government; 
whereas the articles or charter of government 
should be formed first, and men delegated to 
execute them afterwards; but from the errors 
of other nations let us learn wisdom, and lay 
hold of the present opportunity to begin gov- 
ernment at the right end. 

When William the Conqueror subdued 
England, he gave them law at the point of the 
sword; and, until we consent that the seat of 
government in America be legally and author- 
itatively occupied, we shall be in danger of 
having it filled by some fortunate ruffian, who 
may treat us in the same manner, and then, 



70 COMMON SEN?K 

where will be our freedom? where our prop- 
erty? 

As to religion, I hold it to be the indispensa- 
ble duty of government to protect all consci- 
entious professors thereof, and I know of no 
other business which government hath to do 
therewith. Let a man throw aside that narrow- 
ness of soul, that selfishness of principle, which 
the niggards of all professions are so unwilling 
to part with, and he will be at once delivered 
of his fears on that head. Suspicion is thy 
companion of mean souls, and the bane of ell 
good society. For myself, I fully and conscien- 
tiously believe that it is the will of the Al- 
mighty that there should be a diversity of re- 
ligious opinions among us. It affords a larger 
field for our Christian kindness; were we all of 
one way of thinking, our religious dispositions 
would want matter for probation; and on this 
liberal principle I look on the various denom- 
inations among us to be like children of the 
same family, differing only in what is called 
their Christian names. 

In page [97] I threw out a few thoughts on 
the propriety of a Continental Charter (for I 
only presume to offer hiijits, not plans) and in 
this place I take the liberty of re-mentioning 
the subject, by observing that a charter is to be 
understood as a bond of solemn obligation, 
which the whole enters into, to support the 
right of every separate part, whether of re- 
ligion, professional freedom, or property. A 
fi r m bargain and a right reckoning make long 
friends. 

I have heretofore likewise mentioned the ne- 



COMMON SENSE 71 

cessity of a large and equal representation; 
and there is no political matter which more 
deserves our attention. A small number of 
electors, or a small number of representatives, 
are equally dangerous. But if the number of 
the representatives be not only small, but un- 
equal, the danger is increased. As an instance 
of this, I mention the following: when the peti- 
tion of the associators was before the House 
of Assembly of Pennsylvania, twenty-eight 
members only were present; all the Bucks 
county members, being eight, voted against it, 
and had seven of the Chester members done 
the same, this whole province had been gov- 
erned by two counties only; and this danger it 
is always exposed to. The unwarrantable 
stretch likewise, which that house made in 
their last sitting, to gain an undue authority 
over the delegates of that province, ought to 
warn the people at large how they trust power 
out of their own hands. A set of instructions 
for their delegates were put together, which in 
point of sense and business would have dis- 
honoured a school-boy, and after being ap- 
proved by a few, a very few, without doors, 
were carried into the house, and there passed 
in 'behalf of the whole colony; whereas, did the 
whole colony know with what ill will that house 
had entered on some necessary public measures, 
they would not hesitate a moment to think them 
unworthy of such a trust. 

Immediate necessity makes many things con- 
venient, which if continued would grow into 
oppressions. Expedience and right are different 
things. When the calamities of America re- 



72 COMMON SENSE 

quired a consultation, there was no method so 
ready, or at that time so proper, as to appoint 
persons from the several houses of assembly 
for that purpose; and the wisdom with which 
they have proceeded hath preserved this Con- 
tinent from ruin. But as it is more than prob- 
able that we shall never be without a CONGRESS, 
every well wisher to good order must own that 
the mode for choosing members of that body 
deserves consideration. And I put it as a ques- 
tion to those who make a study of mankind, 
whether representation and election is not too 
great a power for one and the same body of men 
to possess? When we are planning for pos- 
terity, we ought to remember that virtue is not 
hereditary. 

It is from our enemies that we often gain 
excellent maxims, and are frequently surprised 
into reason by their mistakes. Mr. Cornwall 
(one of the Lords of the Treasury) treated the 
petition of the New York Assembly with con- 
tempt, because that house, he said, consisted 
but of twenty-six members, which trifling num- 
ber, he argued, could not with decency be put 
for the whole. We thank him for his involun- 
tary honesty.* 

To CONCLUDE, however strange it may appear 
to some, or however unwilling they may be to 
think so, matters not, but many strong and 
striking reasons may be given to show that 
nothing can settle our affairs so expeditiously 



*Those whp would fully understand of 
what great consequence a large and equal repre- 
sentation is to a state, should read Burgh's Po- 
litical Disquisitions. Author. 



COMMON SENSE 73 

as an open and determined declaration for inde- 
pendence. Some of which are, 

First It is the custom of Nations, when any 
two are at war, for some other powers, not en- 
gaged in the quarrel, to step in as mediators, 
and bring about the preliminaries of a peace; 
But while America calls herself the subject of 
Great Britain, no power, however well disposed 
she may be, can offer her mediation. Where- 
fore, in our present state we may quarrel on for 
ever. 

Secondly It is unreasonable to suppose that 
France or Spain will give us any kind of as- 
sistance, if we mean only to make use of that 
assistance for the purpose of repairing the 
breach, and strengthening the connection be- 
tween Britain and America; because, those 
powers would be sufferers by the consequences. 

Thirdly While we profess ourselves the sub- 
jects of Britain, we must, in the eyes of foreign 
nations, be considered as Rebels. The precedent 
is somewhat dangerous to their peace, for men 
to be in arms under the name of subjects; we, 
on the spot, can solve the paradox; but to unite 
resistance and subjection requires an idea much 
too refined for common understanding. 

Fourthly Were a manifesto to be published, 
and despatched to foreign Courts, setting forth 
the miseries we have endured, and the peaceful 
methods which we have ineffectually used for 
redress; declaring at the same time that not 
being able longer to live happily or safely under 
the cruel disposition of the British Court, we 
had been driven to the necessity of breaking 
off all connections with her; at the same time, 



7C , COMMON SENSE 

assuring all such Courts of our peaceable dis- 
position towards them, and of our desire of 
entering into trade with them; such a me- 
morial would produce more good effects to this 
Continent than if a ship were freighted with 
petitions to Britain. 

Under our present denomination of British 
subjects, we can neither be received nor heard 
abroad; the custom of all Courts is against us, 
and will be so, until by an independence we 
take rank with other nations. 

These proceedings may at first seem strange 
and difficult, but like all other steps which we 
have already passed over, will in a little time 
become familiar and agreeable; and until an 
independence is declared, the Continent will feel 
itself like a man who continues putting off 
some unpleasant business from day to day, yet 
knows it must be done, hates to set about it, 
wishes it over, and is continually haunted with 
the thoughts of its necessity. 



COMMON SENSE 75 



APPENDIX TO COMMON SENSE. 

SINCE the publication of the first edition of 
this pamphlet, or rather, on the same day on 
which it came out, the King's Speech made its 
appearance in this city [Philadelphia]. Had the 
spirit of prophecy directed the birth of this 
production, it could not have brought it forth 
at a more seasonable juncture, or at a more 
necessary time. The bloody-mindedness of the 
one shows the necessity of pursuing the doc- 
trine of the other. Men read by way of re- 
venge. And the speech, instead of terrifying, 
prepared a way for the manly principles of 
Independence. 

Ceremony, and even silence, from whatever 
motives they may arise, have a hurtful ten- 
dency when they give the least degree of coun- 
tenance to base and wicked performances; 
wherefore, if this maxim is admitted, it natur- 
ally follows that the King's Speech, as being a 
piece of finished villainy, deserved and still de- 
serves, a general execration, both by the Con- 
gress and the people. Yet, as the domestic 
tranquility of a nation depends largely on the 
cJiastity of what might properly be called NA- 
TIONAL MANNERS, it is often better to pass some 
things over in silent disdain than to make use 
of such new methods of dislike as might intro- 
duce the least innovation on tliat guardian of 
our peace and safety. And, perhaps, it is chiefly 



76 COMMON SENSE 

owing to this prudent delicacy that the King's 
Speech hath not before now suffered a public 
execution. The speech, if it may be called one, 
is nothing better than a wilful audacious libel 
against the truth, the common good, and the 
existence of mankind; and is a formal and pom- 
pous method of offering up human sacrifices to 
the pride of tyrants. But this general massacre 
of mankind is one of the privileges and the 
certain consequences of kings; for as nature 
knows them not, they know not her, and al- 
though they are beings of our own* creating, 
they know not us, and are become the Gods of 
their creators. The speech hath one good qual- 
ity, which is, that it is not calculated to de- 
ceive, neither can we, even if we would, be 
deceived by it. Brutality and tyranny appear 
on the face of it. It leaves us at no loss: And 
every line convinces, even in the moment of 
reading, that he who hunts the woods for prey, 
the naked and untutored Indian, is less Savage 
than the King of Britain. 

Sir John Dalrymple, the putative father of a 
whining Jesuitical piece, fallaciously called 
"The address of the people of England to the 
inhabitants of America," hath perhaps from a 
vain supposition that the people here were to 
be frightened at the pomp and description of a 
king, given (though very unwisely on his part) 
the real character of the present one: "But," 
says this writer, "if you are inclined to pay 
compliments to an administration, which we do 
not complain of (meaning the Marquis of Rock- 
ingham's at the repeal of the Stamp Act) it is 
very unfair in you to withhold them from that 



COMMON SENSE 77 

prince, by ivhose NOD ALONE they were permitted 
to do any thing." This is toryism with a wit- 
ness! Here is idolatry even without a mask: 
And he who can calmly hear and digest such 
doctrine, hath- forfeited his claim to rational- 
ity an apostate from the order of manhood 
and ought to be considered as one who hath not 
only given up the proper dignity of man, but 
sunk himself beneath the rank of animals, and 
contemptibly crawls through the world like a 
worm. 

However,, it matters very little now what the 
king of England either says or does; he hath 
wickedly broken through every moral and hu- 
man obligation, trampled nature and conscience 
beneath his feet, and by a steady and constitu- 
tional spirit of insolence and cruelty procured 
for himself an universal hatred. It is now the 
interest of America to provide for herself. She 
hath already a large and young family, whom 
it is more her duty to take care of than to be 
granting away her property to support a power 
who is become a reproach to the names of men 
and Christians YE, whose office it is to watch 
the morals of a nation, of whatsoever sect or 
denomination ye are of, as well as ye who are 
more immediately the guardians of the public 
liberty, if ye wish to preserve your native 
country uncontaminated by European corrup- 
tion, ye must in secret wish a separation. But 
leaving the moral part to private reflection, I 
shall chiefly confine my further remarks to the 
following heads: 

First, That it fs to the interest of America to 
be separated from Britain. 



78 COMMON SENSE 

Secondly, Which is the easiest and most prac- 
ticable plan, RECONCILIATION OF INDEPENDENCE? 

with some occasional remarks. 

In support of the first, I could, if I judged 
it proper, produce the opinion of some of the 
ablest and most experienced men on this con- 
tinent; and whose sentiments on that head are 
not yet publicly known. It is in reality a self- 
evident position: for no nation in a state of 
foreign dependance, limited in its commerce, 
and cramped and fettered in its legislative 
powers, can ever arrive at any material emi- 
nence. America doth not yet know what opu- 
lence is; and although the progress which she 
hath made stands unparalleled in the history of 
other nations, it is but childhood compared with 
what she would be capable of striving at, had 
she, as she ought to have, the legislative powers 
in her own hands. England is at this time 
proudly coveting what would do her no good 
were she to accomplish it; and the continent 
hesitating on a matter which will be her final 
ruin if neglected. It is the commerce and not 
the conquest of America by which England is 
to be benefited, and that would in a great 
measure continue were the countries as inde- 
pendent of each other as France and Spain; 
because in many articles neither can go to a 
better market. But it is the independance of 
this country of Britain, or any other, which is 
now the main and only object worthy of con- 
tention, and which, like all other truths discov- 
ered by necessity, will appear clear and 
stronger every day. 



COMMON SENSE 79 

First, Because it will come to that one time 
or other. 

Secondly, Because the longer it is delayed the 
harder it will be to accomplish. 

I have frequently amused myself both in 
public and private companies with silently re- 
marking the specious errors of those who speak 
without reflecting. And among the many 
which I have heard, the following seems the 
most general, viz. that had this rupture hap- 
pened forty or fifty years hence, instead of now, 
the continent would have been more able to 
have shaken off the independence. To which I 
reply, that our military ability, at this time, 
arises from the experience gained in the last 
war, and which in forty or fifty years time 
would be totally extinct. The continent would 
not, by that time, have a general, or even a 
military officer left; and we, or those who may 
succeed us, would be as ignorant of martial 
matters as the ancient Indians; and this single 
position, closely attended to, will unanswerably 
prove that the present time is preferable to all 
others. The argument turns thus: At the con- 
clusion of the last war we had experience, but 
wanted numbers ; and forty or fifty years hence 
we shall have numbers, without experience; 
wherefore, the proper point of time must be 
some particular point between the two extremes, 
in which a sufficiency of the former remains, 
and a proper increase of the latter is obtained: 
And that point of time is the present time. 

The reader will pardon this digression, as it 
does not properly come under the head I first 



80 COMMON SENSE 

set out with, and to which I again return by the 
following position, viz.: 

Should affairs be patched up with Britain, 
and she to remain the governing and sovereign 
power of America (which, as matters are now 
circumstanced, is giving up the point entirely) 
we shall deprive ourselves of the very means 
of sinking the debt we have, or may contract. 
The value of the back lands, which some of the 
provinces are clandestinely deprived of, by the 
unjust extension of the limits of Canada, valued 
only at five pounds sterling per hundred acres, 
amount to upward of twenty-five millions, Penn- 
sylvania currency; and the quit-rents, at one 
penny sterling per acre, to two millions yearly. 

It is by the sale of those lands that the debt 
may be sunk, without burthen to any, and the 
quit-rent reserved thereon will always lessen, 
and in time will wholly support the yearly ex- 
pense of government. It matters not how long 
the debt is in paying, so that the lands when 
sold be applied to the discharge of it, and for 
the execution of which the Congress for the 
time being will be the continental trustees. 

I proceed now to the second head, viz. 
Which is the easiest and most practicable plan, 
Reconciliation or Independence, with some occa- 
sional remarks. 

He who takes nature for his guide is not 
easily beaten out of his argument, and on that 
ground, I answer generally That independance 
"being a single simple line, contained within our- 
selves; and reconciliation, a matter exceedingly 
perplexed and complicated, and in which a 



COMMON SENSE 81 

treacherous capricious court is to interfere, 
gives the answer without a doubt. 

The present state of America is truly alarm- 
ing to every man who is capable of reflection. 
Without law, without government, without any 
other mode of power than what is founded on, 
and granted by, courtesy. Held together by an 
unexampled occurrence of sentiment, which is 
nevertheless subject to change, and which every 
secret enemy is endeavoring to dissolve. Our 
present condition is Legislation without law; 
wisdom without a plan; a constitution without 
a name; and, what is strangely astonishing, 
perfect independance contending for dependance. 
The instance is without a precedent, the case 
never existed before, and who can tell what 
may be the event? The property of no man is 
secure in the present unbraced system of 
things. The mind of the multitude is left at 
random, and seeing no fixed object before them, 
they pursue such as fancy or opinion presents. 
Nothing is criminal; there is no such thing as 
treason ; wherefore, every one thinks himself at 
liberty to act as he pleases. The Tories would 
not have dared to assemble offensively had they 
known that their lives, by that act, were for*- j 
feited to the laws of the state. A line of dis- 
tinction should be drawn between English sol- 
diers taken in battle, and inhabitants of Amer- 
ica taken in arms. The first are prisoners, but 
the latter traitors. The one forfeits his liberty, 
the other his head. 

Notwithstanding our wisdom, there is a vis- 
ible feebleness in some of our proceedings which 



82 COMMON SENSE 

gives encouragement to dissentions. The Con- 
tinental Belt is too loosely buckled: And if 
something is not done in time, it will be too late 
to do any thing, and we shall fall into a state 
in which neither Reconciliation nor Indepen- 
dance will be practicable. The king and his 
worthless adherents are got at their old game 
of dividing the Continent, and there are not 
wanting among us Printers who will be busy in 
spreading specious falsehoods. The artful and 
hypocritical letter which appeared a few months 
ago in two of the New York papers, and like- 
wise in two others, is an evidence that there are 
men who want both judgment and honesty. 

It is easy getting into holes and corners, and 
talking of reconciliation: But do such men 
seriously consider how difficult the task is, and 
how dangerous it may prove, should the Con- 
tinent divide thereon? Do they take within 
their view all the various orders of men whose 
situation and circumstances, as well as their 
own, are to be considered therein? Do they put 
themselves in the place of the sufferer whose 
all is already gone, and of the soldier, who hath 
quitted all for the defence of his country? If 
their ill-judged moderation be suited to their 
own private situations only, regardless of 
others, the event will convince them that "they 
are reckoning without their host." 

Put us, say some, on the footing we were in 
the year 1763: To which I answer, the request 
^ not now in the power of Britain to comply 
with, neither will she propose it; but if it 
were, and even should be granted, I ask, as a 



COMMON SENSE 83 

reasonable question, By what means is such a 
corrupt and faithless court to be kept to its 
engagements? Another parliament, nay, even 
the present, may hereafter repeal the obliga- 
tion, on the pretence of its being violently ob- 
tained, or unwisely granted; and, in that case. 
Where is our redress? No going to law with 
nations; cannon are the barristers of crowns; 
and the sword, not of justice, but of war, de- 
cides the suit. To be on the footing of 1763, it 
is not sufficient that the laws only be put in 
the same state, but that our circumstances like- 
wise be put in the same state; our burnt and 
destroyed towns repaired or built up, our pri- 
vate losses made good, our public debts (con- 
tracted for defence) discharged; otherwise we 
shall be millions worse than we were at that 
enviable period. Such a request, had it been 
complied with a year ago, would have won the 
heart and soul of the Continent, but now it is- 
too late. "The Rubicon is passed." 

Besides, the taking up arms, merely to en- 
force the repeal of a pecuniary law, seems as 
unwarrantable by the divine law, and as re- 
pugnant to human feelings, as the taking up 
arms to enforce obedience thereto. The object, 
on either side, doth not justify the means; for 
the lives of men are too valuable to be cast 
away on such trifles. It is the violence which 
is done and threatened to our persons; the 
destruction of our property by an armed force; 
the invasion of our country by fire and sword, 
which conscientiously qualifies the use of 
arms: and the instant in which such mode of 



S4 COMMON SENSE 

defence became necessary, all subjection to 
Britain ought to have ceased; and the indepen- 
dence of America should have been considered 
as dating its era from, and published by, the 
first musket that was fired against her. This 
line is a line of consistency; neither drawn by 
caprice, nor extended by ambition; but pro- 
duced by a chain of events, of which the colo- 
nies were not the authors. 

I shall conclude these remarks, with the fol- 
lowing timely and well-intended hints. We 
ought to reflect, that there are three different 
ways by which an independancy may hereafter 
be effected; and that one of those three, will, 
one day or other, be the fate of America, viz. 
By the legal voice of the people in Congress; 
by a military power; or by a mob: It may 
not always happen that our soldiers are citi- 
zens, and the multitude a body of reasonable 
men; virtue, as I have already remarked, is 
not hereditary, neither is it perpetual. Should 
an. independancy be brought about by the first 
of those means, we have every opportunity and 
every encouragement before us, to form the 
noblest, purest constitution on the face of the 
earth. We have it in our power to begin the 
world over again. A situation, similar to the 
present, hath not happened since the days of 
Noah until now. The birthday of a new world 
1s at 'hand, and a race of men, perhaps as num- 
erous as all Europe contains, are to receive 
their portion of freedom from the events of a 
few months. The reflection is awful, and in 
this point of view, how trifling, how ridiculous, 
do the little paltry cavil ings of a few weak or 



COMMON SENSE 85 

interested men appear, when weighed against 
the business of a world. 

Should we neglect the present favorable and 
inviting period, and independence be hereafter 
effected by any other means, we must charge 
the consequence to ourselves, or to those rather 
whose nafrow and prejudiced souls are habit- 
ually opposing the measure, without either in- 
quiring or reflecting. There are reasons to be 
given in support of independence which men 
should rather privately think of, than be pub- 
licly cold of. We ought not now to be debating 
whether we shall be independent or not, but 
anxious to accomplish it on a firm, secure, and 
honorable basis, and uneasy rather that it is 
not yet begun upon. Every day convinces us of 
its necessity. Even the Tories (if such beings 
yet remain among us) should, of all men, be the 
most solicitous to promote it; for as the ap- 
pointment of committees at first protected 
them from popular rage, so, a wise and well 
established form of government will be the only 
certain means of continuing it securely to them. 
Wherefore, if they have not virtue enough to 
be WHIGS, they ought to have prudence enough 
to wish for independence. 

In short, Independence is the only BOND that 
ties and keep us together. We shall then see 
our object, and our ears will be legally shut 
against the schemes of an intriguing, as well 
as cruel, enemy. We shall then, too, be on a 
proper footing to treat with Britain; for there 
is reason to conclude, that the pride of that 
court will be less hurt by treating with the 
American states for terms of peace, than with 



8ti COMMON SENSE 

those, whom she denominates "rebellious sub- 
jects,'* for terms of accommodation. It is our 
delaying in that, encourages her to hope for 
conquest, and our backwardness tends only to 
prolong the war. As we have, without any 
good effect therefrom, withheld our trade to 
obtain a redress of our grievances, let us now 
try the alternative, by independantly redress- 
ing them ourselves, and then offering to open 
the trade. The mercantile and reasonable part 
of England, will be still with us; because, 
peace, with trade, is preferable to war without 
it. And if this offer be not accepted, other 
courts may be applied to. 

On these grounds I rest the matter. And 
as no offer hath yet been made to refute the 
doctrine contained in the former editions of 
this pamphlet, it is a negative proof, that 
either the doctrine cannot be refuted, or, that 
the party in favor of it are too numerous to be 
opposed. WHEREFORE, instead of gazing at each 
other with suspicious or doubtful curiosity, let 
each of us hold out to his neighbor the hearty 
hand of friendship, and unite in drawing a line, 
which, like an act of oblivion, shall bury in 
forgetfulness every former dissention. Let the 
names of Whig and Tory be extinct; and let 
none other be heard among us, than those of a 
good citizen; an open and resolute friend; and 
a virtuous supporter of the RIGHTS OF MAN- 
KIND, and of the FREE AND INDEPENDENT STATES 
OF AMERICA. 